Mobility Design Sustainability Go Behind the Scenes at the School That Inspires Automotive Sustainability.
The future of cars isn't simply switching from gasoline to electric power or moving around the angles of body panels to suit current trends. It's sustainable, boundary-pushing design that literally reinvents the wheel. Hyundai Motor Group (HMG), the parent company of the Genesis, Kia and Hyundai brands, is taking an aggressive tack, using the brainpower and creativity found at the Rhode Island School of Design (RISD) to inspire its team, discover future designers and search for paths forward when it comes to vehicle design. "RISD offers HMG—and other partners that work with us from various industries—a chance to think in entirely different ways that question the assumptions behind initial or usual approaches," Sarah Cunningham, vice provost for strategic partnerships at RISD, told Newsweek. "We like to turn the problem set upside down and inside out before developing a research trajectory. This allows us to engage in untapped avenues for development." For the automotive industry, that means using natural inspiration, among other strategies, to help create more sustainable vehicles. "Autonomous vehicles, electrification and alternative fuels such as hydrogen fuel cells are setting the stage for rethinking the entire future of mobility, with so much possibility for design innovation, from the vehicles themselves to how we think of roads and even the future of cities," Jennifer Bissonnette, interim director of the Edna W. Lawrence Nature Lab at RISD, told Newsweek. Students and faculty at the Nature Lab are considering mobility as a driving force for positive change. One tact is looking at vehicles like they are organisms, efficiently built with materials that would be infinitely recyclable into either technical or biological nutrients. RISD students are thinking about cars that create clean air or drinking water, and recentering cities around human and ecological health. "Our students and faculty are exploring just this kind of nature-informed design, with inquiry that scales from the microstructures on insect wings that allow them to stay clean and dry, to ways of transitioning old infrastructure such as parking garages into hubs for community building and local food resilience," Bissonnette said. "RISD offers the possibility of both near-term design improvements and long-term envisioning of what nature-informed, sustainable mobility could look like." On a recent tour of the school, RISD's team took Newsweek behind the scenes and showed off the facilities that are home to this unique initiative. The partnership allows HMG employees to gain access to RISD's Edna W. Lawrence Natural History Collection. The Nature Lab contains about 100,000 specimens, including shells, rocks, worms, birds and large mammals. They're kept in cases, drawers, taxidermied and on display, and mounted on the walls as if peering down at the students studying them below. Its design takes inspiration from 17th-century vintage cabinets-of-curiosities, but the specimens aren't being used to reimagine the past—they're being deployed for the sake of the future. "The track record and experience of the Nature Lab is invaluable to this project. A decades-long commitment to observing the natural world, conducting fieldwork, utilizing imaging tools for visualization and seeking biological expertise to connect to design departments and fine arts projects means that RISD has a very specific expertise shaped over the years (well before the climate crisis) to prioritize the natural world in arts/design training," Cunningham said. Small specimens can be found at RISD's Microscopy Lab. Here, thousands of creatures are stored in two-inch-by-two-inch acrylic boxes awaiting their turn under the stereo microscope. This type of equipment specializes in the viewing of items that are not opaque, and can magnify them up to 185 times their natural size. Using microscopes like this allows researchers to take digital images of the specimens. The even-smaller fungus spores and plant cells, among other microscopic matter, are stored on glass slides where students and faculty use compound microscopes, which have the ability to magnify the specimens up to one thousand times their real size. For organic and inorganic materials, RISD also has a scanning electron microscope. By magnifying them up to 45,000 times their actual size, researchers gain a new perspective on surfaces frequently thought of as being smooth, like poppy seeds, and inside the structures of crystals. This gives new insights in both design and utility of the materials, which can then be iterated upon when thinking about vehicle design. The Nature Lab isn't just home to creatures whose time living on this planet has passed, or objects that were formed by nature to reside alongside those creatures. There are also several live animals (arthropods, mollusks, jellyfish and small mammals) who call RISD home. Their purpose is to provide insight into biology and behavior in ways that lifeless specimens cannot.

New, Electric Porsche Macan Matches High Horsepower With Daily Driveability.
A Stuttgart, Germany-based Porsche has made an all-electric SUV that's centered on performance, with the bonus of also being primed for daily driver duties. The redesigned 2024 Porsche Macan was revealed this week. Newsweek was among the first members of the automotive media to ride in the model late last year. The Macan is the best-selling Porsche and the smallest spot utility vehicle (SUV) the company makes. Despite being small, it's big on Porsche personality, albeit for a new generation. Divided headlights, frameless doors, and pronounced shoulders are key to the design characteristics. The SUV is 188.4 inches long, 84.7 inches wide and 63.8 inches high. That's two inches longer than the previous version and around eight inches wider. It's about the same height. Its wheelbase is 3.4 inches longer than the 2023 Macan's. The new Macan can be optioned with up to 22-inch wheels with staggered tire fitment. Porsche will offer the 2024 Macan in two variations: Macan 4 and Macan Turbo. Development of the models combined lessons learned from the development of the company's all-electric sports car, the Taycan. "Our aim is to offer the sportiest model in its segment with the all-electric Macan. In many ways, we are taking a very successful SUV to a new level," Jörg Kerner, Vice President Product Line Macan, said in a press release. The new Macan follows in the DNA of its predecessors. The Macan 4 will offer 402 horsepower (hp) and 479 pound-feet (lb-ft) of torque to drivers. It can get off the line and to 60 miles per hour (mph) in 4.9 seconds. It can reach 136 mph on a track. Porsche's 2024 Macan Turbo has 630 hp 833 lb-ft of torque at the ready. That power pushes the SUV to 60 mph off the line in 3.1 seconds. Its top track speed is 161 mph. All that power comes from a 100 kilowatt-hour battery pack that is part of the car's 800-volt architecture. This is the first time Porsche has deployed the architecture. Other automakers, including those under the Hyundai Motor Group umbrella, already use similar technology in their models. Porsche expected Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) range estimates to be made available closer to the car's launch date. The electric Macan can charge at a rate of up to 270 kilowatts, moving from a 10- to 80-percent state of charge in as little as 21 minutes under ideal charging conditions. Porsche has enabled the model to recoup power via regenerative braking. Both the Macan 4 and Macan Turbo come equipped with all-wheel drive. It combines with available rear axle steering and an electronically controlled differential lock on the rear axle to deliver the traction, driving stability and lateral dynamics Porsche owners have come to expect in a vehicle. "Thanks to its particularly sporty seat position and low center of gravity, as well as its impressive driving dynamics and steering precision, the new Macan delivers a real sports car feeling," said Product Line Vice President Jörg Kerner in a press release. An air suspension and the SUV's active suspension management program allow drivers to enjoy the ride, while honing the drive characteristics that they desire. Macan's electrified platform has allowed for more cargo space in the new model than the last. It's also made it possible for a 2.9 cubic-foot storage space to be available under the hood. Porsche has given the Macan a 4,409-pound towing capacity. The interior of the Macan has been redesigned for the SUV's new era. It features an LED light strip extending from the doors through the cockpit that acts as ambient light and a communication center that can provide warnings based or information based on the situation. Eco-friendly interior elements are part of the new Macan's roster. Buyers can opt for leather-free seats. Floor mats and flooring feature Econyl, a material made from regenerated nylon. In front of the driver is a 12.6-inch instrument cluster while a 10.9-inch infotainment screen sits at the center of the dashboard. A matching 10.9-inch passenger screen is also available. It allows passengers to stream video while the car is in motion. A head-up display and augmented reality technology are part of the new Porsche Driver Experience. Drivers can say "Hey Porsche" to awaken voice control functionality. The Macan's infotainment system is new for this generation and runs Android Automotive OS in the background. Drivers can utilize Apple CarPlay while behind the wheel as well. Porsche has priced the Macan to start at $78,800 for the Macan 4. The Macan Turbo will set buyers back $105,300. Both models' pricing does not include the $1,650 delivery fee. Interested parties can order a new, electric Macan now. First deliveries are expected in the second-half of 2024.

Chevy Changes Up Equinox As Honda, Subaru Get More Competitive.
The 2025 Chevrolet Equinox is getting a mid-generation looks, equipment and technology refresh in 2024. The model, the little brother of the Chevrolet Blazer and Traverse, is one of the best-selling in its class. Compact sport utility vehicles are some of the most popular models on the market today. The group, filled by the likes of the Honda CR-V, Toyota RAV4, Subaru Forester, Kia Sportage and Ford Escape, among others, dominates driveways, school pickup/drop-off lines and grocery store parking lots across the nation. As the Equinox has aged as Honda, Subaru, and Kia have introduced redesigned, new-generation versions of the CR-V, Forester and Sportage.The Escape and RAV4 are aging alongside the Equinox and have received upgrades throughout their lifecycles. "The 2025 Equinox brings to one of our most important nameplates bodylines and proportions inspired by our brand's truck DNA, also adopted in the upcoming Traverse," said Scott Bell, vice president at Chevrolet in a press release. "It also builds on the core strengths that have earned Equinox tremendous customer loyalty over the past two decades, and made it the second-best seller in our lineup, after Silverado." Refreshed looks on the new Equinox bring its styling in line with the Chevrolet Trax, Trailblazer and Traverse. The Equniox takes its exterior design inspiration from the Traverse, and wears strong proportions compared to the previous model year's design. It's also wider, has squared wheel openings, and is illuminated only by LEDs. These looks and equipment changes are only applicable to gas models. The all- electric Equinox EV has already been revealed. For the 2025 model year, Chevrolet will sell the Escape in three trim levels: LT, RS and ACTIV. The 2024 model came in four grades: LS, LT, RS and Premier. All versions of the 2024 Escape were available with all-wheel drive. Chevrolet has designed the Equinox ACTIV to have more rugged looks than the rest of the Equinox family, including blacked out badging, fresh fascia with vertical grille inserts and gray metallic-finished accents and 17-inch machined-face aluminum wheels. Its interior features a Maple Sugar and Black color theme, with seeded microfiber seating surfaces. "ACTIV" is embroidered on the driver and passenger seat head restraints. Heated and ventilated front seats and rear heated outboard seats make the options list, as does memory driver seat personalization and a two-tone paint job. Equinox RS is designed to be sleeker, with 19-inch Carbon Flash machined aluminum wheels, black emblems and mirror covers, an available black roof, wide grille, and high-gloss finish on the fascia. It also has Torch Red and Santorini Blue stitching on the SUV's seats, debossed "RS" logos on the headrests and a flat-bottom steering wheel. Heated and ventilated front seats, and heated outboard rear seats are on the options list. The Equinox models have been changed up to feature an 11-inch configurable driver information screen that is paired with an 11.3-inch infotainment screen that is angled slightly toward the driver. The infotainment system runs on Google built-in technology, like Honda's CR-V. Other highlights of the refreshed interior include a standard heated steering wheel and heated front seats, new materials on trim pieces, a split-folding (60/40) second-row bench seat, hidden rear cargo storage, available wireless charging, and a new electronic shifting mechanism that opens up more space below the instrument panel. For 2025, Equinox comes with a long list of standard safety and driver assistance technology including automatic emergency braking, forward collision alert, front pedestrian and bicyclist detection and emergency braking assistance, following distance indicator, lane keeping assist, lane departure warning and automatic high beam headlights. Teen Driver technology, which helps parents monitor the use of their vehicle while their teen is behind the wheel, is also standard. Buyers can add side bicyclist detecting, a rear camera mirror, rear seat reminder, adaptive cruise control, lane change alert with blind zone alert, enhanced automatic emergency braking rear cross-traffic alert with braking, rear part assist and enhanced lane keeping assistance to their model. The engine in the Equinox is unchanged. All versions come with a turbocharged 1.5-liter four-cylinder engine that delivers 175 horsepower for use. Front-wheel drive models get a continuously variable transmission while all-wheel drive Equinoxes have an eight-speed automatic (up from a six-speed in the 2024). There is no hybrid or plug-in hybrid version of the Equinox. Toyota, Honda, Kia and Ford all offer some level of electrification in their competitor models. Front-wheel drive Equinox RS and ACTIV models have Normal and Snow drive modes. Versions with all-wheel drive get Off-Road mode. When equipped with all-wheel drive, the SUV is capable of towing 1,500 pounds. Chevy says that they will release pricing information closer to the start of the vehicle's production. The 2024 Equinox is priced starting at $27,995 and goes up to $34,795 before destination and delivery fees.

New Hyundai Santa Fe Moves Company's Sustainability Mission Forward.
One can be forgiven for looking at the new Hyundai Santa Fe and not seeing it as a creature that exemplifies modern sustainability. It is, after all, a medium-sized SUV by most of the world's standards and not a battery-electric vehicle. But, it is one of the more sustainable vehicles you'll be able to buy in 2024. It's chock full of real innovation that moves the sustainability ball forward in tangible ways. That starts with exterior. Here, a palette of earthy hues wash over the car. They're accented by glossy black paint that uses carbon black that includes recycled materials. Exclusive to North America, they Santa Fe's Encantado Grey exterior paint body color uses natural charcoal made out of bamboo to achieve its color. The interior incorporates even more sustainability-minded materials from top to bottom. Up top, a sueded headliner made from recycled materials sets the tone. Bulked continuous filament (BCF), a long strand of continuous fiber consisting of recycled fibers, makes up the floor mats. Non-woven PT, a fabric composed of recycled fibers bonded in a random pattern, backs the midsize SUV's second- and third-row seat backs. Those fibers are sourced from polyethylene terephthalate (PET) bottles from China. Hyundai's supplier took the chips that were made from those bottles and spun it into the yarn that was used to create the backing surface. The SUV's crash pads and door trim covers are wrapped in eco-friendly artificial leather. Many of these touches are similar in nature to what is inside the new Kia EV9, which should serve as no surprise considering the companies share common ownership, Hyundai Motor Group, led by Executive Chair Euisin Chung, who has championed sustainability as being at the core of its future. "Hyundai, Kia and Genesis have sustainability initiatives. That trickles down, out into everybody: designers, engineers, manufacturing," John Robb, president of the Hyundai Kia America Technical Center, Inc. told Newsweek. For Hyundai, putting these sustainable touches inside its new Santa Fe is part of the company's larger strategy, which company officials say is being driven partially by regulation and partially by the company's ethos. It goes beyond cars. Robb says that the proving grounds he's in charge of are working to become carbon neutral. That means putting in solar power and beginning engineering processes with carbon neutrality in focus. And, it's a continuously evolving cycle. The next decade's cars, trucks and SUVs coming down the Kia, Hyundai and Genesis lines are already being worked on. Suppliers are already receiving requests letting them know what percentage of recycled product the Hyundai Motor Group companies require in those coming bits and pieces that make up the models.

Ford's Best-seller Dominance May Soon End Thanks to Tesla.
More than one Ford F-Series truck is sold every minute. The model continued its sales reign in 2023 becoming the top-selling vehicle overall for the 41st consecutive year. But, the truck may not make it to a 42nd year. For the first time in a long time the leader of the market has a challenger that is rising in the ranks for best-selling vehicle overall. It's not another pickup truck, but an electric vehicle (EV). Compared to the Ford F-Series, the Tesla Model Y is a fairly new player in the automotive space. It's been on sale since 2020, but only sold around 40,000 units that first year. In 2022 it was the country's best-selling EV. But, Americans love their trucks, and the way the automakers report their sales has bouyed them to the top of the rankings for decades. Ford lumps all its full-size truck sales together, calculating F-150, F-150 Lightning, and Super Duty models as one "F-Series" group number. Ram does the same with the 1500, 1500 Classic and HD models. GM's Chevrolet and GMC brands follow a similar tack. Tesla have continued to climb. In 2023, about 400,000 of the vehicles were delivered to new owners, putting it behind the Toyota RAV4 as the fifth best-selling vehicle in the U.S. That same year, it became the best-selling vehicle on the planet, with Tesla moving more than 1.06 million of them globally. "The Model Y beat out incredibly strong and established brands did so with far fewer permutations. Additionally, the rest of the world has caught up to the U.S. in terms of SUV acceptance, which has paved the way for Model Y to become a top seller globally too," Tyson Jominy, Vice President, Data and Analytics at J.D. Power told Newsweek. EV adoption acceptance, and low entry prices, may aid the Model Y's path to the top spot. "Instead, it's facing off with gas-powered cars like the Toyota RAV4. Toyota's inventory remains quite tight, likely impacting its overall sales volume. Furthering the point, the Model Y benefits from a $7,500 clean vehicle tax credit, which undoubtedly helps boost its sales," Matt Smith, deputy editor at CarGurus told Newsweek. "EVs still trail internal combustion vehicles in terms of overall sales, but their popularity is growing and Tesla remains the dominant player in the EV space, thanks to a remarkably strong brand and a superior public charging infrastructure," Smith said. There were electric cars before Tesla, but they were small, slow and sometimes off-putting. "So, Tesla says 'electric cars are great, maybe a benefit,' and makes them sexy and fast and luxurious. Then the Model Y comes along and it's an electric version of car that everyone already wants," Brian Moody, executive editor of Kelley Blue Book tells Newsweek. "Honda CR-V and Toyota RAV4 owners want those kinds of cars that are also quick and reasonably nice inside." A few years ago you needed a luxury car to get heated and cooled seats in the front and back, and you now get that in a Kia Forte. The differentiators must be something besides features, Moody says. "And Tesla does that through software. Like Dog Mode. It's a system that keeps the air conditioning on when a dog is in there. It has a words on the screen that say 'my owners know I'm in here and I'm comfortable at 72 degrees.' They didn't invent something new. But little things like that make the difference. Like Ludicrous mode, they didn't invent a Sport mode, they just called it something cool." There's also the unquantifiable "cool factor" that has married itself with the Tesla brand. Despite rising criticism of the company's CEO Elon Musk regarding his commitment to free speech on the X social media platform, formerly Twitter, and perceived political alliances in 2023, the brand's image has remained intact.
Honda Shows Off Fresh Civic, Adds a Hybrid, Promises New Acura SUV.
Honda's North American business is essentially back to normal following the years of turmoil that were the result of the business side effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. Sales reached near pre-pandemic levels in 2023 and the cadence of new product hit a fever pitch. That fever hasn't broken. "In 2023, we were finally able to meet the pent-up demand for our products with both brands rebounding and American Honda finishing the year up over 30 percent. We projected a strong recovery, and we achieved that," said American Honda Senior Vice President of Sales, Mamadou Diallo. In 2024, American Honda will continue to invest in its internal combustion engine portfolio and launch its first high-volume battery-electric vehicles (BEVs), add new technologies to existing hot sellers and ready for a new Passport SUV to come to market. American Honda's vehicle portfolio is comprised of two brands, Honda and Acura. "Honda is leveraging its successful hybrid growth before its EV rollout to build consumer confidence and lay a strong foundation, creating tailwinds for its electrification strategy," Paul Waatti, manager of industry analysis at AutoPacific, told Newsweek. "Acura has whitespace in its portfolio for an compelling new entry-level crossover, and building off the excitement of the recently released Integra with a similarly positioned product in crossover form is perhaps what the brand needs to ignite sales with new, younger buyers." Acura's 2024 will usher the all-electric ZDX SUV to market. The SUV, based on the Chevrolet Blazer and co-manufactured with General Motors, will go on sale in February, when interested parties can begin placing orders via Acura's website. In early 2024, customers will be able to complete their purchase online as well, without ever having to set foot in a dealership. The brand's best-selling model will get a few new features in 2024, thanks to some added and deleted equipment. The Bang and Olufsen sound system that is in the ZDX will be made available in the MDX. Acura's derided touch pad-based infotainment system will be replaced with a touch screen version this year, and the center console reconfigured accordingly for better usability. Customers will also benefit from an improved list of styling and technology changes. Google built-in will have its home running the three-row SUV's infotainment functions and an advanced suite of AcuraWatch safety and driver assistance technology will be available. Acura revealed little about its planned changes for the RDX two-row SUV during a video conference on Wednesday saying that it will, "receive updates to enhance its appeal and functionality." The premium automaker promises that a new crossover will debut later this year, positioned alongside the Integra car as a gateway to the brand. According to records in the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office database, Acura received a trademark for "CDX" in November 2022 in regard to automobile naming rights. This filing is traditionally a key indicator of a future vehicle's name before it is publicly revealed. Honda's all-electric version of a midsize SUV will launch at the beginning of the year, first with sales in zero-emissions-friendly states, mostly along the East and West Coasts. Then, the vehicle will be sold nationwide. An alternative fuel version of the Honda CR-V will come to market later this year. Built and developed in conjunction with General Motors, the model will be able to be driven as a pure battery-electric model or using hydrogen for fuel to power the car's electric motors, similar to how hybrid cars of today use gasoline to power their engines, but they can run in "EV mode" for a few miles on only battery power. When it comes to market the CR-V FCEV will be North America's first production vehicle that combines a plug-in feature with FCEV technology in one model. Like it's Accord and CR-V stablemates, the Civic is getting a hybrid powertrain for the 2025 model year. It also will get styling and feature enhancements, the automaker says. Honda expects that hybrid versions of the car will comprise about 40 percent of the models' sales when it goes on sale in sedan and hatchback form. Honda previewed the upcoming redesign of the Passport in a rendering for members of the media that is not yet public. In its new form, the Passport will get more rugged looks, in line with the redesign of the Toyota Land Cruiser and Lexus GX, complete with prominent roof rails, chiseled exterior lines, beefy tires, and a Land Rover Range Rover-like design nod at the rear. The automaker plans to bring the new Passport to market next year.

Ford's New Electric Truck Previews Possibility of Lightning Raptor.
Ford introduced a high-performance concept variant of its all electric F-150 Lightning pickup, which experts say could point to a possible off-road-ready Raptor version of the truck being in development, at a motorsports event on Wednesday. The F-150 Lightning Switchgear was created with help from RTR Vehicles, a performance part and complete vehicle company created by driver and drifter Vaughn Gittin Jr. The company, with initials standing for "Ready To Rock," has partnered with Ford several times before. Ford says the Switchgear concept truck was inspired by the F-150 RTR Ultimate FunHaver project vehicle from 2016, also designed by Gittin Jr. He has developed numerous one-offs for Ford. The driver helped with the Mustang Mach-E 1400 prototype, which delivered 1,400 horsepower from its electric motors, and they collaborated on the Bronco RTR FunRunner, with another super high-performance powertrain and more wild design details. He additionally helped Ford develop its Drift Stick, a parking brake feature that's made for drifters. Ford says the concept could "take F-150 Lightning where it's never been and to learn lessons that could be applied to future Ford electric trucks." The automaker has a long history with high-performance trucks, most recently with the Raptor, but previously with the original Ford Lightning, a high-performance version of its gas-powered truck. "Off-road, the F-150 Raptor is a massively capable truck. It's only been a matter of 'when' the electric F-150 Lightning will be treated to a more rugged, trail-ready version of its own. Sans the racing-spec buckets with five-point harnesses and rally-inspired e-brake handle, most of what's previewed by this Switchgear show truck is all certainly doable," Robby DeGraff, product and consumer insights analyst for AutoPacific told Newsweek. "I'd expect a lots of the same equipment, both mechanical upgrades and styling tweaks, to eventually make its way to a production-ready, more off-road suitable trim for the F-150 Lightning." The Lightning Switchgear has a wider track width over the F-150 Lightning, which improves off-road stability. It also has a higher ride height. It uses Fox's 3-inch diameter internal bypass shock absorbers in the suspension along with unique front and rear bumpers to improve approach and departure angles. It also has a custom independent double-wishbone suspension at the front, and multilink independent suspension in back with coilover shocks, stabilizer bar and custom control arms. "Compared to all other segments, demand for pickup trucks (whether full-size or mid-size) is the lowest among EV intenders per our AutoPacific data. However, our research has shown that 84 percent of those electric pickup truck intenders say 'their vehicle needs to accommodate their active outdoor lifestyle.' That's actually substantially more of a 'must' than ICE pickup truck intenders, so Ford offering a dedicated off-road model for its F-150 Lightning could be a smart, worthy strategy to pursue. It honestly doesn't even have to be a full-blow Raptor, even a toned-down Tremor could be perfect," said DeGraff. The Ford F-150 Lightning Switchgear will make its first public appearance at the King of the Hammers off-road racing event starting Jan. 25, in Johnson Valley, California. That race happens every winter and combines desert racing and rock crawling. For the nine-day race week, the Means Dry Lake bed turns into a temporary settlement nicknamed Hammertown where in 2022 there were roughly 400 teams and 80,000 spectators in attendance for the event.

Amazon by Day, Uber by Night: Kia's New Models to Serve Double Duty.
Kia is ready to customize a vehicle for you. No, not in the way Porsche, Rolls-Royce or Mercedes-Maybach is. The Korean automaker has created a Purpose Built Vehicle (PBV) that could end up as an Uber and Amazon delivery vehicle in one. Three versions of PBV Concepts were presented at CES, a consumer electronics trade show, in Las Vegas. Kia Concept PV 5 previews the new, modular vehicle that will be at the front of the company's PBV business. Concept PV 7 and Concept PV 1 represent larger and smaller, respectively, versions of models that are slated for launch further down the road. Together, the concepts present a vision of the automaker's multi-phase, decade-long plan to have PBVs transform the mobility space. Several automakers offer vehicle configurations that can be upfitted to meet a customer's needs, whether it be passenger shuttle service to and from the airport, or the specialty equipment needed to operate as a tow truck. The electric vehicle chassis market is far smaller, both in sales and product offerings. Industry leaders in commercial vehicles like Rivian and Mercedes-Benz, do not offer cutaway models or "skateboards" for sale, preferring to stick to vans. Ford does sell its battery-electric E-Transit in a number of configurations including cargo van, cutaway and chassis cab. Kia PBVs are designed to utilize easily swappable technology to flexibly address the diverse demands of customers. Behind the fixed cab, where the driver sits, owners will be able to install "life modules" that can be connected to the base vehicle via a hybrid electromagnetic and mechanical coupling. The body assembly, which is made of high-strength tubular steel and engineered polymers, allows for standardized interface that enables owners to change the configuration of their PBV on demand. For example, it can operate as a taxi during the day, a delivery van at night and a personal recreation vehicle on the weekends, Kia says. "Kia's PBV business represents our vision of going beyond the traditional concept of automobiles by fulfilling the unmet needs of diverse customers and communities through optimized vehicles and services catering to specific market and business circumstances," said Ho Sung Song, Kia Corporation President and CEO. The next decade will see PBVs develop in three distinct phases. The first phase will have Kia introducing a production-ready model based on Concept PV 5. Those models will support business-to-business customers that operate large fleets. Kia will sell the production version of Concept PV 5 in four varieties: people mover, high roof, robotaxi and pickup. People mover versions will be designed to support the operations of transport service providers like Uber and Lyft. High Roof versions allow the driver to walk all the way to the cargo and could be used by delivery services like Amazon. Robotaxis will be developed to be utilized by Motional (a joint venture between Hyundai Motor Group and Aptiv). Pickups will be made for global use cases. Dedicated models will be developed. They will support artificial intelligence (AI) based control, management and automation of customer business processes. Kia promises that as autonomous driving technology advances it will applied to the PBVs. Those models, dubbed PV 7 and PV 1 will have unique identities. PV 7 will be the largest vehicle in the lineup and be defined by more interior space and more driving range, and what Kia calls "enhanced functionalities". PV 1 is slated to be the smallest model in the lineup. It's optimized for agility and short-distance logistics transportation.Further development of the product is projected to include bespoke solutions for customers that reflect the changing nature of mobility. The highly personal offerings will have AI technology, coordination with advanced air mobility solutions, include robotics and feature swappable solutions. "Kia PBVs will initiate a new era of seamless everyday business and lifestyle solutions. We hope to make our customers' lives easier and better, whether they're stationary or on the move, offering exceptional flexibility and customization through radical modularization," said Karim Habib, Executive Vice President and Head of Kia Global Design, in a press release. Kia will launch a dedicated business system alongside the PBV business, similar to what Ford has developed with its Ford Pro business solution suite of services.

Hertz Drops 20,000 Rental Electric Vehicles in Favor of Gas-powered Models.
Hertz has decided to sell 20,000 electric vehicles (EVs) from its rental fleet including Teslas, Chevrolets and BMWs, saying it will replace them with gas-powered vehicles, according to regulatory filing on Thursday. The company cited higher repair costs as the primary reason. It could be seen as a warning in the EV market, Morgan Stanley analysts told Reuters, saying expectations for the electrification of the transportation sector need to be reset downwards. That follows news of both Ford and GM slowing their production and delivery of their respective electric vehicles. In 2022, Hertz ordered 100,000 Tesla vehicle and later ordered 65,000 Polestar EVs over the next five years. On its website the company is selling some Tesla Model 3s for about $20,000, about half the price of a new version. And those used EVs still partially qualify for Inflation Reduction Act related rule-making EV tax credit meaning buyers could improve the deal further. "For those of you who like the Tesla product but don't want to directly pad Elon's coffers (I know quite a few of you who fit that description), maybe here's a way to get into one? They're being replaced by gas cars so Hertz's sale of these cars doesn't lead to new Tesla sales to replace these," Ed Kim, President and Chief Analyst at AutoPacific said on the business networking site Linkdin. "You'll still have to pay Tesla for internet access and you are still giving them tons of valuable data, but if you've ever wanted a Tesla but had issues with Elon Musk, an ex-Hertz Tesla might be for you. Plus, these should qualify for the federal used EV tax credit of 30 percent of the price, up to $4,000, for even greater savings," Kim wrote. The Hertz car sales site shows a Tesla Model Y Long Range for $31,955. That model has a range of 310 miles on a charge. Used Teslas also come with access to the company's Supercharger network. The site also has dozens of Tesla Model 3s and Kia and Chevrolet EVs. Despite the sale, the Hertz company has been doing its part to get more drivers into EVs. In 2023 it held several events in Denver, Los Angeles and elsewhere allowing drivers to take a ride in one of the new Tesla, Subaru, Polestar, and Kia vehicles in its fleet. It also provides guidance to renters who choose an electric vehicle such as how to operate and charge them, and where to find stations when on the road.

Ford's New Plastic Auto Parts Are Made From Olives.
Ford Motor Company noted a milestone moment in the long race to make vehicle manufacturing more sustainable, the company announcedtoday. It has found a way to convert the waste from olive trees (branches, twigs and foliage), into auto part prototypes. Not only does this reduce waste, the company found that the parts are durable enough for use in production vehicles, reducing the amount of plastic used under the sheetmetal. The new technology was unveiled during an announcement of the automaker's partnership with the COMPOlive project. The combination of forces is meant to show the usability of recycled and renewable materials. The project has three goals: to change the management of pruning and enhance socio/economic aspects of the olive sector from an environmental perspective; to develop new fibers/biocomposites with a broad range of application to reduce fossil-based virgin plastic and to support the European Union's plan to make the continent's economy more circular. The waste materials were sourced from olive groves in Andalusia, Spain, which has the highest production of olive oil in the world. The prototype parts consisted of 40 percent olive tree fibers and 60 percent recycled polypropylene plastic. The substance is then heated and molded into the shape of the selected part. That waste would normally be burned, meaning better air quality at harvest time, or stored, meaning it would have to transported to a collection location. To figure out if the material would be usable it used material simulations at its European headquarters in Cologne, Germany. Once it approved of the moldability, strength and durability of the material it began creating prototype parts. For says it's now evaluating the parts and processes for wider implementation. Ford noted that this isn't nearly the first time it found a way to use sustainable materials inside a vehicle. It created industry-first soybean-based foam seats and headrests, and used post-consumer recycled materials like yogurt cups for things like frunk inserts in the Ford Mustang Mach-E and recycled ocean plastic in clips in the Ford Bronco Sport. "At Ford, we're always looking for ways to become more sustainable, and sometimes inspiration can strike from the most unlikely places. In using the waste from olive trees, we have been able to substitute a significant amount of petroleum-based raw material in the interior parts. Sustainable fibers create a unique surface appearance and would be directly visible to our customers," Inga Wehmeyer, project lead, said in a press release. The project is part of Ford's "The Road To Better" initiative to incorporate sustainable materials in its vehicles, transition more of its manufacturing to renewable, carbon free electricity, save water and reduce waste to zero.

Mercedes-Benz is Turning Your Car Into a Rolling Concert Hall.
Luxury automaker Mercedes-Benz has levied partnerships with Audible, Amazon, Dolby, Apple and Universal Music Group to up its audio system game. Mercedes-Benz continues to build its audio system advantage over other luxury automakers. This week at CES, a consumer electronics trade show, the German car company announced that it has joined forces with Audible and Amazon Music to deliver a "a new chapter of in-car storytelling". Like a concert hall, Mercedes models will be hosting top-tier music, spoken word and visual performances, pushing high-quality sound to owner ears. The partnership will allow Mercedes vehicle drivers the opportunity to enjoy audio books and plays, podcasts and music via their vehicle's audio system, harnessing the power of Dolby Atmos technology. Dolby Atmos is a spatial audio technology that delivers an immersive sound experience. In October, Mercedes announced that it would be the first company to make Dolby Atmos natively available in vehicles and in doing so became the first non-Apple device to offer the technology. Mercedes drivers who were already subscribed to Apple Music gained immediate access to the songs and albums available with spatial audio qualities via Dolby Atmos. "This important step in the history of recorded music is the culmination of years of working together with our partners at Dolby to develop the Dolby Atmos Music format so we can provide our artists with an even wider palette for their creative expression. With Mercedes, a company that shares our passion for quality and innovation, fans can now enjoy our artists' music in Mercedes cars in a way that virtually transports them to the recording studio or live stage," Sir Lucian Grainge, Chairman and CEO of Universal Music Group said in September when the According to a 2022 survey of 1,750 car-driving residents of  Germany, France, China, Great Britain and the United States by Mercedes-Benz and Appinio, 76 percent reported that having a realistic spatial sound was either "important" or "rather important" to them. Dolby Atmos is available in the Mercedes-Maybach S-Class, the Mercedes-Benz S-Class as well as the EQE, EQE SUV, EQS and EQS SUV. It is integrated into the vehicles' Burmester 3D and 4D sound systems, allowing the models to become "state-of-the-art concert halls on wheels" the automaker said in a press release when hardware is combined with Dolby Atmos software. The Burmester 4D sound system is the highest-end audio option Mercedes offers. It incorporates 31 speakers (including six 3D speakers that emit sound from above, four near-ear speakers in the front seats and an 18.5-liter subwoofer), eight sound transducers and two amplifiers. The in-seat speakers provide a "sound massage", Mercedes said.

Gas Rebate of $200 Could Be Paid in One State.
Car owners in Washington state could be receiving more than $200 if a gasoline rebate passes through the state legislature. Republican lawmakers proposed the one-time rebate in response to the state's cap-and-trade program's gas price hikes. To lower carbon emissions, Washington hiked gas prices last year, resulting in an excess of $1.3 billion in state revenue. Now, GOP state Representatives April Connors and Mary Dye are proposing to give the extra money back to car owners who felt the strain of the skyrocketed gas prices. Washington's gas prices are still among the most expensive in the country, averaging around $4.06 per gallon. If the rebate passes, registered vehicle owners in the state would see a $214 check, Connors told Newsweek. Families with two cars would get double that. She said her constituents, many of them senior citizens, routinely tell her the gas hikes caused them to make significant cuts to their grocery budgets. "A senior said they had to limit all of their trips, from going to the grocery store to picking up prescriptions, and they were having to combine their trips into one drive," Connors told Newsweek. "They said that they felt like they were living back in the days of COVID where they were stuck at home and they couldn't get out of the house." Because Washington saw the $1.3 billion excess, Connors said, the money should be given back to residents who shouldered the pain of the initial price hikes. "We're not touching the original intent of what Washington was trying to do with the Climate Commitment Act, which was to help with greenhouse gas emissions," she said. "We're just taking excess revenue, which was 1.3 billion, divided up by Washington drivers." From students driving to work and school to senior citizens pressed for cash in retirement, the gas hikes were felt by hardworking Washington residents, Dye said. "Our college students trying to get to work and school, they have very tight budgets," Dye told Newsweek. "This takes a real chunk out of their ability to earn enough when they're commuting back and forth to work and school. It hurts the senior citizens on fixed incomes." "The people that are doing work every day and the families that are doing work every day, it just takes it right out of their pocket and unnecessarily so because they stated what they needed in the Climate Act to accomplish their goals. And yet the formulas were incorrect, and I think it's right to give the money back to the working families of Washington state." Some lawmakers are against the rebate going through, however. Senator Jamie Pedersen, who sponsored the cap-and-trade program, said the rebate goes against the goal of the initial carbon emission hikes, which aimed to get people to use less gas. "I think it's pretty unlikely that we're going to divide up all of the money that we got from the Climate Commitment Act, all the excess revenue, and give it back to people based on how much gas was consumed in the state," Pedersen said, as reported by KOMO-TV Seattle. "We want people to take transit, we want people to use electric vehicles, or walk or bike." Mark Sexauer, a Seattle resident in the construction industry, said the rebate would be a big help at his company, which operates 93 vehicles. "Any change in gas price affects our construction company, often significantly," Sexauer told Newsweek. "A rebate check would only benefit us as our industry is experiencing many different financial challenges. I'm skeptical this will pass but I'm glad there are people in office thinking about how to send money back as 99 percent of the time it seems like the other way around." Connors said since they first discussed the rebate in July, there's been significant conversation about it, and she hopes they can push the hand of the majority Democratic Party in Washington. "I think there's some appetite for what's going on," Connors said. "I think that they're feeling a lot of pressure." It is unclear when residents can expect an update on the rebate, but if passed, it would go into effect in July.
VinFast Continues American Onslaught With EVs at CES.
Vietnamese automaker VinFast took the stage at the 2024 CES show in Las Vegas. CES, a consumer electronics show, runs from January 9-12 at the Las Vegas Convention Center. The company showed off three electric vehicles (EVs) on Tuesday including the previously shown VF 9 full-size SUV, the new mini eSUV VF 3 and a new concept pickup. The VF 3 is an extra small SUV. At just 125 inches it would be dwarfed on American roads by even our compact vehicles. The four seater has a range of 125 miles on a charge, however it does come with modern conveniences like Apple CarPlay and a touchscreen infotainment system. The VF 3 will be available this year. VinFast says pricing and information about which regions get which cars will come later. The other vehicle is a concept electric pickup called VF Wild and it is correctly sized for the U.S. market at 209 inches, about the same size as a Chevrolet Colorado midsize truck. It features a power-folding midgate like the GMC Sierra Denali EV, adapting the bed length from 5 to 8 feet when necessary. The VF Wild concept was jointly developed by VinFast and Australian design studio GoMotive. "VinFast has struggled to break into the U.S. market meaningfully but is working furiously to build momentum. Sales of the VF8 have been slower than anticipated, with lukewarm reception and a series of compounding launch issues. That's not entirely surprising for a new, unknown foreign startup trying to enter what's arguably the most challenging auto market to penetrate — with pickier buyers and higher standards in the U.S. than many other global markets," Paul Waatti, manager of industry analysis at AutoPacific told Newsweek. Last week VinFast appointed Pham Nhat Vuong, founder and Chairman of Vingroup Joint Stock Company, VinFast's parent company, to the Chief Executive Officer position, capping off a series of changes as the company has expanded globally. "Company turnover and executive changes have been regular, likely persisting as the company deploys substantial capital and spreads itself thin, building out infrastructure with new plants in India and the U.S., simultaneously reaching further into other global markets. The most recent CEO change puts Vingroup's founder and largest VinFast stakeholder at the helm, suggesting the company realizes the great lengths it must take to succeed globally," said Waatti. Additionally, the company said it has officially signed a group of dealers to sell its imported EVs in the United States. The new network includes locations in Raleigh, North Carolina, St. James, New York, Grapevine and Fort Worth in Texas and one in Wichita, Kansas. VinFast says these dealers will initially begin selling the VF 8 all-electric SUV, with plans to add the VF 6, VF 7, and VF 9 models when they launch in the US market. It plans to include 125 dealers across the country. "The automaker has shifted from direct-to-consumer sales to a hybrid sales approach with a growing U.S. dealer presence. Leveraging existing dealer footprints should help to broaden its reach. VinFast has an influx of new models on the horizon for the U.S. and global markets to appeal to varying segments and price points," said Waatti. In the summer of 2023 VinFast broke ground on its $4 billion EV factory in North Carolina with former CEO Le Thi Thu Thuy noting that "the event marks a new milestone for VinFast, affirming our commitment to the North American market." It would be the first auto factory in the state and one of the biggest investments in the state's history. VinFast says the operation will create 7,500 jobs over the next decade and will be able to produce 150,000 vehicles per year at the plant once it's finished in 2025. Having a plant in the U.S. would allow VinFast vehicles to qualify for the new EV tax credit that only works if the vehicle is assembled in North America. Helping the project along, VinFast was offered incentives to build the plant. North Carolina has provided VinFast with a $1.2 billion package that includes $38 million for job training. Additionally, the company could get up to $316 million in reimbursement from the state over three decades if it meets hiring goals. The company is also working with local universities and colleges to help train a workforce in STEM (science, technology, engineering, math) fields "to stay ahead of the trend, help future generations easily access science and technology and find well-paying transportation-related jobs." On the other side of the world the company just said it plans to spend up to $2 billion to build an electric vehicle factory in India, which is the third largest auto market behind China and the U.S. The company has already committed $500 million to the first phase of the project, which will be located in the port city of Thootukudi. "VinFast faces an uphill battle globally — particularly in the U.S. — but it's far too early to discount its potential success. With immense capital backing, ambition, and grit, underestimating VinFast at this early point would be premature," Waatti said. Honda launched a new series of electric vehicles (EVs) at the CES event in Las Vegas this week. The consumer electronics show is now a massive exhibit for automakers, a show that used to be reserved for smaller electronics like video games, computers and cell phones. The global Honda 0 Series will launch in 2026 first with a model based on the North American Saloon concept shown at CES. It will be followed by other models for Japan, Asia, Europe, Africa and the Middle East and South America. Honda says both the Saloon and Space-Hub concepts were design and engineered using a new approach, and that "it has gone back to basics" to give people a new perspective and doesn't want to follow the trend of "thick, heavy" EVs, according to CEO Toshihiro Mibe."This is a lot of news to unpack for Honda, and it sets the stage for an exciting close to this decade for the automaker. The Saloon is particularly intriguing since Honda is saying that it foreshadows a production model due in 2026; that's a short and exciting timeframe for a vehicle with such a forward-thinking design. Just how much of that design makes it to the real thing will be fun to watch out for," David Undercoffler, Editor-in-Chief of Autolist.com told Newsweek. The low-slung Saloon EV will be the flagship of the series riding on a dedicated EV platform. Honda says it uses sustainable materials inside and out. With a philosophy that aims for more space for humans and less for the machine, the wide exterior offers a surprisingly spacious cabin. Honda's EV platform will be also be thin, with a low, aerodynamic floor and more interior space. Honda says the concept also uses steer-by-wire technology using the company's experience in robotics, however, it will prioritize the enjoyment of driving with its sportcar-like driving posture. A production car based on the Saloon concept will come to the North American market in 2026. The second concept is called Space-Hub, which has the look of a minivan and seems primed for autonomous driving. The company says the vehicle will offer flexible space and become a hub "that connects people to each other and the outside world." Before either of those concepts come to fruition the U.S. will see the 2024 Honda Prologue on public roads. The electric SUV, which is slightly larger than the company's popular CR-V, is on sale now for around $50,000. The Prologue was built in partnership with General Motors and uses the American company's Ultium EV platform. "All this comes on the heels of the surprising news in October that the automaker was ending its short-lived EV partnership with GM, which was focused on building affordable EVs for the masses. That announcement happened before Honda was even able to bring to market its Acura ZDX luxury electric crossover and its Honda Prologue compact EV crossover, two models it co-developed with GM," said Undercoffler. Additionally, at the CES event Honda introduced its new H mark logo that will be used for its next EV models. The current Honda H dates to 1981. The new design is said to symbolize two outstretched hands and represents "Honda's commitment to meet the needs of its customers," according to the press release. Honda says the new H will be used on future Honda 0 Series vehicles. As expected, the future Honda 0 Series vehicles will feature the next generation of Honda's advanced driver-assist system currently named Honda Sensing. The next generation will feature advanced AI, sensing, recognition, and monitoring technologies to drive more naturally. Honda says it will expand the application of some of its hands-off driving functions as well. They will also be connected to the internet and infrastructure, learning the user's preferences and making suggestions. The 0 Series vehicles will use an e-axle, a contained system that consists of a motor, inverter and gearbox, and powers the wheels. It's also paying special attention to battery size and longevity, using a smaller, lighter weight unit that will fast charge from 15 to 80 percent in 10-15 minutes. With battery controls Honda is aiming to minimize the degradation of battery capacity to less than 10 percent over 10 years. The current average degradation rate is about 2 percent per year. "The brand acknowledged that the CES announcement of the Honda 0 Series was 'starting from the beginning,' so clearly Honda isn't wasting any time in pivoting to a new direction of EVs as it works to hit its self-imposed deadline of selling only electric vehicles by 2040," said Undercoffler.

BMW Joins Mercedes, Tesla to Make In-car Gaming a Reality.
The BMW Group, including BMW, MINI and Rolls-Royce, jumped into the in-car gaming world at CES, a consumer electronics trade show, today in Las Vegas. The ninth generation of BMW's operating system utilizes third-party apps and games in the BMW ConnectedDrive Store to deliver the experience to customers.
In addition to games the app store will offer tools for communication, productivity, news and other infotainment. BMW joins Mercedes-Benz, Tesla and others now with ways to play in the vehicle. "BMW is synonymous with both the ultimate driving machine and the ultimate digital experience," said Frank Weber, Member of the Board of Management responsible for BMW Group Development, in a press release. "At the CES we are showing more content, more customization and more gaming. This is all underpinned by our in-house developed BMW Operating System. And we will take a look to the future with augmented reality and reliable artificial intelligence at the interaction between human and machine." At the electronics show BMW showed a game called Beach Buggy Racing 2, a throwback racing video game meant to feel like the home console titles of the '80s and '90s. Two passengers can compete against each other in the same vehicle with a split-screen setup, which the model is parked. With connected vehicle technology becoming more advanced and popular, it wouldn't be difficult to allow over-the-air play with other BMW drivers, experts believe. BMW said that players will be able to connect their own favorite controllers to the vehicle via Bluetooth, a feature that is coming via an over-the-air update later this year.All of this technology is in addition to the AirConsole App, which already lets BMW customers play single and multiplayer games in their car. Those are more casual games, like ones a player would play on their smartphone, which can also be used as a controller. The AirConsole list of games is also being constantly added to. Games will be available via the BMW Digital Premium, and is only available for models with BMW Operating System 9. It can be found in the ConnectedDrive Store either online, in the MyBMW App or directly from the car. BMW covers the necessary data usage from the package. There was a lot of news about in-car gaming a few years ago, first when Tesla boss Elon Musk said that its Model S sedan could run the modern and graphically difficult video game The Witcher 3 and more recently when it added Steam compatibility. Steam is a video game store and distribution platform and now Teslas with 16 gigabytes of RAM can download and play from a library of thousands of current-generation games. Mercedes made news offering the casual Angry Birds smartphone game on its infotainment screen in 2023. Now at CES the luxury brand also announced a collaboration with retro games streaming service Antstream Arcade, which will integrate cloud gaming into the car. The system is showcased in its 2024 E-Class sedan, and in an advanced future version demonstrated at CES. Gaming formats are universal in their location within vehicles. Screens in front of the driver are not utilized. Instead, a centrally located infotainment screen and screens in front of the passenger

Space Is the New, Not Final Frontier For Automakers.
Elon Musk isn't the only automaker CEO thinking about space. Many automakers have either sent equipment to the stars or helped NASA do the same. General Motors has has been working with NASA for decades. Toyota, Kia and Hyundai have fresher stellar ambitions. "General Motors made history by applying advanced technologies and engineering to support the Lunar Rover Vehicle that the Apollo 15 astronauts drove on the Moon," said Alan Wexler, senior vice president of Innovation and Growth at General Motors in a press release. "Working together with Lockheed Martin and their deep-space exploration expertise, we plan to support American astronauts on the Moon once again." GM, in conjunction with Lockheed Martin and NASA, is designing an electric moon roving vehicle based on the technologies it has been working on. GM says that unlike the Apollo rovers that only traveled 4.7 miles (7.6 kilometers) from the landing site, the new rovers will have to travel farther and over rougher terrain. It will also use autonomous, self-driving systems to prepare for human landings, provide commercial payload services, and improve the utility of scientific experiments. Lockheed is a veteran of space travel, having built spacecraft and systems that have "gone to every planet, been on every NASA mission to Mars including building 11 of the agency's Mars spacecraft, and played major roles on the space shuttle program and International Space Station power systems." Earlier this year the Hyundai brand said that it is working on a new rover as well. Hyundai Motor Group made a deal with six Korean research institutes in the aerospace sector to support lunar exploration. The group includes the Korea Astronomy and Space Science Institute (KASI), Electronics and Telecommunication Research Institute (ETRI), Korea Institute of Civil Engineering and Building Technology (KICT), Korea Aerospace Research Institute (KARI), Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute (KAERI) and Korea Automotive Technology Institute (KATECH). The Group expects to complete the initial test unit as soon as the second half of 2024 and aims to create a model that has launch capability in 2027. Many of the lunar vehicle components are derived from technology that is in today's cars. The rover will use Hyundai Motor Company and Kia Corporation's camera and lidar systems, motor, wheels, suspension and charging equipment. Those parts will create lower section of the rover while the top half will be full of scientific instruments for lunar testing. As it will be in an extreme environment, the rover will have thermal management function and radiation shielding. HMG says the rover, which will land near the south pole of the moon on a date to be determined, will weigh around 150 pounds. In 2019, Toyota said it was beginning a research project with the Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) and the main vehicle was completed in 2022. The vehicle, nicknamed Lunar Cruiser, is a crewed pressurized rover meaning the environment is pressurized to create an environment similar to Earth's. Once inside, passengers won't need suits. "This crewed pressurized rover offers both mobility and habitability, enabling astronauts to move around and explore the moon's surface for prolonged periods beyond the confines of the landing site. In a sense, it is a spaceship that drives on the moon," Fumiya Tsutsui, Director for Space Exploration, JAXA Space Exploration Center (JSEC), Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) said at a press conference in July. The vehicle, which was created with the help of Mitsubishi Heavy Industries' Space Systems Division, measures about 20 feet long and 17 feet wide, meaning a large footprint of more than 340 square feet, and 12.5 feet tall. Tsutsui says it will be able to carry two astronauts around the surface of the moon for 30 days.

Lucid Gravity Designed To Minimize Production Problems.
Building cars isn't just complex, it's expensive. Lucid Motors, like Ford Motor Company, loses money with every car is produces. In the third quarter, Lucid lost $227,802 per model, far more than Ford's $62,000. The two-model startup, which only has the Air sedan in production, struggled out of the gate in 2021 when assembly started with quality control issues. Other startup automakers have had similar issues, including Fisker. Seasoned car companies often have stumbling blocks when they release a new vehicle. "Building vehicles at scale and profitably is among the most challenging undertakings in modern manufacturing. That's particularly true for startups like Lucid entering series production for the first time with its cutting-edge tech, but even new vehicle launches for legacy OEMs rarely go flawlessly," Paul Waatti, manager of industry analysis at AutoPacific told Newsweek. As Lucid embarked on the design of its first battery-electric sport utility vehicle (SUV), the Gravity, the company looked to not include elements from the Air's design that have been production pain points for the electric vehicle (EV) maker. "When I look back at Air, I think the interior. Even though the overall look of the interior is quite simple and minimalist, there are a lot of parts - material changes; there's a lot of components. There's a lot of changes between colors throughout the different colorways," Derek Jenkins, senior vice president of design and brand at Lucid told Newsweek, while sitting in the Gravity's front trunk. "With Gravity, we've been able to harmonize a little bit more and have more synergy between the different colorways. So therefore, we're having less complexity." He gave examples. The interior brightwork in the Air has not been carried over to the Gravity. Instead, there's just little accent elements. This was done to allow Gravity to have a better price point and to increase the quality level of the model.Also, it' better for the environment, Jenkins said, explaining that it ticks four boxes: production, complexity, cost and sustainability. "Ultimately, that goes back to the consumer," he said. The Gravity is slated to start at around $80,000. The smaller Mercedes-Benz EQS SUV and Audi Q8 E-Tron start at $104,400 and $74,400, respectively. "Lucid felt the crushing reality of the true cost of manufacturing vehicles with the Air sedan launch issues in 2021, but it now has those early lessons to build on for the Gravity launch. It's always a tricky line for automakers to straddle design and complexity. Less is usually more in manufacturing, and form follows function," Waatti said. "Overly intricate designs and material transitions often require added component costs and complicated assembly procedures. Reducing styling and manufacturing complexities is cost-effective and usually outweighs the perceived benefit of a more detailed design. It generally means higher quality products out of the factory with fewer things to go wrong and a better consumer experience in the long run." Lucid manufactures all its vehicles at its plant in in Casa Grande, Arizona, halfway between Tucson and Phoenix. When it opened, it was the first greenfield electric vehicle factory in North America. It initially had a 10,000-vehicle-per-year capacity. Planned upgrades would allow the company to manufacture up to 300,000 models per year there.The company announced plans last year to build a plant in Saudi Arabia. Lucid's largest shareholders include Saudi Arabia's Public Investment Fund, its affiliate Ayar Third Investment, Vanguard and BlackRock, among others, according to InvestorPlace, an independent financial research firm.

2024 Genesis GV80 Review: True Luxury for a Modern Family.
It took the Hyundai group about 20 years to move into the Lexus/Acura phase of foreign automakers selling in the United States. The brand started out as the name on the top Hyundai model but spun off in 2007 with its own sedan. Since then, it has introduced a few more sedans, and now the brand has a full line of SUVs, minus a full-size. The Genesis GV80 is its biggest SUV and its most luxurious. The Crest Grille emphasizes bold luxury while the trademark Parabolic Line runs along the side. The quad lamps, a hallmark of the brand, will certainly be the most recognizable feature and Genesis says they were inspired by orchids. Though three-rows, the GV80 competes with luxury SUVs like the BMW X5, Mercedes-Benz GLE and the three-row Audi Q8. It's almost the exact same size as the Audi. The 2024 Genesis GV80 has two engine options. The first is a turbocharged four-cylinder delivering 300 horsepower (hp). Upgraded models come with a turbocharged 3.5-liter six-cylinder engine making a healthy 375 hp. This Prestige model (the GV80 comes in standard and Prestige Signature trims) has the V6, standard all-wheel drive and an automatic transmission with paddle shifters. That engine provides plenty of power to accelerate from a stop quickly to get in front of traffic. It can also downshift several gears at a time as when getting on the expressway behind a super slow semitruck. If a driver needs to get from 25 mph to 75 mph quickly, it can do that. It's also comfortable and quiet as legal and extra legal expressway speeds, though the brakes are a bit soft. That makes for more of a luxury feel, but in a panic situation it makes the heart skip a beat. It has a steering assist feature that is better than most. It does notify the driver to keep their hands on the wheel if it doesn't sense movement. It sometimes feels like it lines up too close to oncoming traffic, but if you look in the mirrors the car is actually centered in the lane. The adaptive cruise control works perfectly, being especially useful in slow-going traffic situations. The suspension is compliant, but maybe a little stiff in Normal mode. It does jiggle a little bit over uneven pavement and the suspension does transmit sound to cabin but most of the time it's perfectly smooth. It was also great on bumpy grass and dirt roads in mid-Michigan with more than 8 inches of ground clearance. Thankfully the doors wrap around the bottom of the car mud is kept off the sills. That means when you step out you won't have muddy calves. The cabin in this tester was excellent with light and dark brown perforated leather along with diamond patters on the seats and wave patterns on the doors. The heating and massaging functions work great and the seats have extra adjustments for side bolsters and under the knee. Our only complaint is that they don't go low enough. It feels like you're balancing on top of the vehicle. The four-spoke steering wheel features redundant controls while most of everything else is controlled through the rotary dial. The low, wide, centrally mounted screen is touch sensitive, but it's far from the driver's reach. Wired Apple CarPlay and Android Auto are standard. The in-house infotainment system works well with the rotary dial. The large icons are laid out horizontally and are easy to read. The navigation is great and swapping through functions is easy. But Apple's interface is still the king. The 2024 GV80 features a digital instrument cluster with a 3D effect. It looks cool with different gauges on different planes and isn't as disorienting as some from Mercedes and Hyundai. The head-up display is one of the best on the market with blind spot indicators, and little boxes showing the cars moving around the vehicle. The GV80 comes standard with loads of safety and convenience features including adaptive cruise control that also uses the navigation system and predictions to serve the driver. Highway Driving Assist helps assist the driver in a wider variety of situations than before, including lane change when the turn signal is used. Emergency braking, blind spot collision avoidance and rear cross-traffic alert are also standard and none of it felt intrusive while on the road for a few hours. Like many cars today, it also has a driver attention warning to monitor the driver and warn them when they seem fatigued. The 2024 Genesis GV80 starts at $57,450. That lines up closely with the Mercedes GLE at $57,700 but it much less than the BMW X5, which starts at $65,200. The aging Volvo XC90 is also an option at $56,000. The leader in the segment is the Acura MDX, with a price of about $50,000 The Genesis offers something the Germans can't. It's a coolness that says to the world, "I can afford a German luxury SUV, but this has more style and character and that's what is important." And because we know car buying is an emotional purchase, the GV80 should have plenty of handraisers, however, it' not only behind the Acura and Volvo in sales, but it's also slightly behind the Lincoln Nautilus as well. If you're in the market it is definitely worth a test drive.

AMG Boss Defines What the Brand Means in the Electric Vehicle Era.
The AMG of today and tomorrow stand for the exact same thing, performance and luxury. But, the formula for tomorrow's AMG isn't as simple to discern as it has been in the past. That said, in an era where connected digital technology is infiltrating everything from car parts to car sales, the notoriously petrol-fueled AMG brand isn't in the midst of an identity crisis. "We are a product company. And, we define ourselves by our product," Michael Schiebe, CEO of Mercedes-AMG, told Newsweek in an exclusive interview late last year in Spain. "We have a very strong motorsport heritage. And, I know we also have a very strong V8 heritage. And this is a challenge, to be honest." The steep apex ahead isn't just portfolio electrification of the AMG brand, it's convincing AMG customers of today and tomorrow that electrification, including full battery-electric powertrains, are worth spending their money on. "We have V8 lovers out there. To convince them that an all-electric car can be as emotional as the V8, it's a task, but we accept the challenge. And we are pretty sure, because we know what we have in the pipeline when it comes to all-electric driving, that we can convince them," Schiebe said. That convincing is not needed now, necessarily. Schiebe said that AMG, and it's larger Mercedes-Benz overlords are balancing objectives (being an all-electric brand by 2030) with customer demand. "We will remain committed to offer all the different powertrain options. So, we will continue on our [internal combustion engine] portfolio. Especially in the U.S. we see there's a constant demand for the V8, for the six-cylinder, so we will continue to deliver them and upgrade them," he said. "We said we can be an all-electric company in the year 2030. We can if the market conditions allow and if our customer wanted. But, if there is still the demand for combustion engine, we will cater their needs ... We will have this combustion footprint still, but at the same time, we will go all-electric, because we just believe that in the future, there will be the performance segment, which will be all-electric." AMG stands for more than just powertrain proficiency. It's about vehicle driving dynamics as well. Those sport-tuned characteristics will be as important in the future as they are today, Schiebe relayed. "It's very important for us as a brand, that we bring our DNA from today into this all-electric future ... The team actually sat together for many many months and workshops ... And they thought about, 'What do we need to do if we want to give our customers the experience that they have today in the all-electric future?' So, it's driving dynamics, it's emotions. And, emotion can be design, it can be sound, it can be different things." Criteria for future AMG electric models is being determined today. "We define certain criteria. And if we are now discussing the future product substance of a car, which could be an all-electric car, then we go through that list and say, 'Can we tick the boxes that we have defined?'" Schiebe stressed that there will be certain criteria that every electric AMG car will need to meet, specifically calling out models that will launch by mid-decade and later, saying it will be "new chapter of all-electric performance cars". The AMG brand leader is determined to ensure that the company's products remain aspirational, undiluted by the AMG-like trim packages that are available on Mercedes-Benz cars. Those models lack the power, tuning and drive dynamics that AMG branded vehicles get. "If you want to go with your car from A to B, you can do this in a cheaper way than with an AMG," he explained. "But if you want to do it in style, and if you want to have a certain performance," then AMG is ready for you to be its customer. "The best thing to position a brand is by its product, because products need to convince the customer ... If we deliver superior products, the brand speaks for itself," Schiebe said.

2023 Audi SQ5 Review: Quick and Competent No Matter the Weather.
The Audi Q5 has been one of the most popular compact luxury SUVs of the year, beating out longtime rivals from BMW and Mercedes-Benz. A few years ago, following Mercedes' lead it added a second coupe-like bodystyle to the lineup, which broadened the appeal to fans of a sportier look. The German automaker's S models, as in S6 as opposed to A6, or SQ5 as opposed to Q5, is the equivalent of BMW's M line of sporty vehicles in that they come with bigger, more powerful engines, sportier suspension and styling. For 2024 there are a few additions including standard Audi active lane assist, heated steering wheel with Hands on Detection (HoD), and remote start with the myAudi app (except for PHEV models). Premium Plus trims are offered with navigation including a trial subscription to Audi Connect Plus. Interior material packages have also changed with new Black Optic trim packages and Arkona White paint replaces Ibis White. The Audi SQ5 Sportback comes with a turbocharged 3.0-liter six-cylinder delivering 349 horsepower (hp) and 369 pound-feet (lb-ft) of torque. It has a fast-acting eight-speed automatic transmission with paddle shifters that feel like they're actually shifting on command. In some vehicles the time between pressing the paddle and the shift feels like a full second. In the SQ5 it's fractional. At full tilt it can get to 60 miles per hour (mph) in 4.7 seconds. The SQ5 sounds grumbly during a cold startup, but in a cool way. It this, the highest-performance version of the Q5 line, the six-cylinder engine is snappy off the line and in traffic. The eight-speed automatic is excellent in Sport mode where shifts rival that of a dual-clutch transmission. During high-speed travel the engine is mostly quiet, as is wind and road noise. The SQ5 Sportback also comes standard-equipped with adaptive dampers and this one had the optional air suspension that allows for adjustment of the ride height in addition to the firmness of the suspension. Dynamic steering is also available and offers a variable steering ratio that adjusts based on vehicle speed. That means the already small SQ5 is even easier to park while still being stable at high speed. It also has Allroad and Off-Road settings, perfect for taking dirt roads to an early Christmas dinner. It was smooth and controllable in the slop, only slamming over one chuckhole that was exceptionally deep. With Audi's refined all-wheel drive system, it's a breeze to power through turns even if the weather is bad. The cabin of this SQ5 was covered in red leather with diamond stitching on the seats. Those seats are firm but surprisingly comfortable over a few hours' drive. They also have great adjustments for a low, cocooned driving position. The rest of the interior is typical Audi with a giant sunroof letting light in and brushed metal and carbon fiber trim. The knobs are excellent and clicky and easy to use while driving. It comes standard with a 10.1-inch touchscreen infotainment system with Apple CarPlay and Android Auto. The screen is high on the dashboard so it doesn't look as clean as more integrated setups. The 12.3-inch digital instrument cluster has viewing modes for classic, sport and dynamic. On SQ5 models an S Performance mode is added with a speedometer and tachometer. A Bang & Olufsen sound system with 705 watts is optional. The technology all works well and the multitude of cameras are great for parking and moving through small spaces. They do need to be clean though. After a few hours on dirt roads they became next to useless.
The SQ5 and other Audi's also have vehicle-to-X (V2X) capability meaning they can talk to traffic lights, among other things. This means it can tell you how long until a red light, or how long until a green light when you're stopped. It also suggests taking your foot off the accelerator when an upcoming light is changing. The SQ5 looks small from the outside but feels spacious inside, even with two booster seats in the second row. It's only down about one cubic foot of cargo space from the non-Sportback SQ5. The SQ5 Sportback comes with blind spot monitors, lane departure warning, emergency braking front and rear, parking sensors and rear cross traffic assist standard. Adaptive cruise control with Traffic Jam assist, which steers, accelerates and brakes automatically at speeds up to 40 mph is optional, as is the top-view camera. The Audi SQ5 Sportback competes with the sportier versions of the BMW X3, Lexus NX and Mercedes-Benz GLC. The Mercedes is the only one with a coupe-shaped version, however. The AMG GLC 43 Coupe starts at $68,200 with 416 hp. The Audi has a base price of $60,400. The BMW X3 M40i with 382 hp is $61,900 and the mid-range Lexus NX350 has a 275-hp turbocharged 2.4-liter four-cylinder engine and starts at $43,965. The Audi outsells the rest for a reason, it has the right combination of sportiness and comfort, all-wheel control and technology. The BMW has a sportier feel all around, but a harsher ride. The Mercedes AMG GLC is faster, and more luxurious, but also more expensive. Either of the German three are fine choices, the NX doesn't feel as put together as the bigger RX, which is an excellent choice in the midsize segment. But here in compact luxury land, stick to the Germans.

Automakers Want Small Footprints From Big Sustainability Initiatives.
Sustainability isn't just for the rich. Most of America's first electric vehicle (EV) offerings have been expensive luxury vehicles, with the exception of the Chevrolet Bolt and Nissan Leaf. As new, lower-cost vehicles have come to market, there has been a conversation shift from zero-emission vehicles (ZEVs) to carbon neutrality. But carbon neutrality knows no socioeconomic lines. It's for everyone, for customers of bespoke Indian-owned Italian supercar outfit Automobili Pininfarina, down to the new crop of eco vehicles from Hyundai, Volvo and Mitsubishi. Going green affects residents of areas surrounding harbors, like the Port of Long Beach, California, who are disproportionately afflicted with asthma. And those that live around the pollution that comes from manufacturing and power plants, junk yards and fuel depots. For automakers, it's not only about designing and building new EVs, it's about a holistic approach to carbon neutrality from the top to the bottom of their operations. Toyota is among the companies that have made carbon neutrality their main goal. While some eco advocates may point to environmentally friendly practices as the number of EVs available on dealer lots, it has more to do with the less sexy and visible elements of the business: using sustainable materials, greening shipping and logistics, treating surfaces naturally rather than with harsh chemicals, saving scrap for reuse, and taking plastic out of the ocean to give it a new life. Automobili Pininfarina is at the top of the market. The company, founded by famed designer Battista "Pinin" Farina in 1930, has created bespoke sports car builds from its founding. Its Pininfarina Battista is a supercar by all measurements, but it uses four electric motors at the wheels delivering 1,877 horsepower (hp) instead of a gas-burning internal combustion engine. It's not just the motive force that's sustainable, it's the entire vehicle. "As guardians of the Pininfarina brand, we will never compromise on the design values that made this marque famous in the past. Yet as pioneers of a new era in luxury, we will apply our expertise to ensure that sustainability is at the core of the automotive art forms of the future," Dave Amantea, Chief Design Officer at Pininfarina told Newsweek. Pininfarina uses fallen olive tree leaves that are collected and used to tan the leather it puts into vehicles, making each piece unique. Because this technique is used, the leather is traceable. The process is checked and certified every year by an independent commission. The company says nothing is wasted in this process, with the scraps being collected and sent to a company called Authentic Material, to be reconstituted and incorporated into future vehicles. It does the same with aluminum. The scraps are collected, melted down and reformed to be featured again. Even the material used in the floormats protecting the surface of the footwell is sustainable. It's created in a material called Econyl, by a company that collects plastics found in the ocean and converts them into durable, high-quality textiles. Volvo's new electric vehicle, the EX30 SUV, goes beyond its powertrain being designed from scratch to have the smallest carbon footprint over the course of its lifetime. With a total footprint now below 30 tons of carbon dioxide (CO2), it beats Volvo's C40 and XC40 over a lifetime by 25 percent. Even Mitsubishi, who those improvements to inform its future vehicle as well in an effort to reduce its CO2 emissions by 40 percent per car between 2018 and 2025. The 2024 EX30 uses about 17 percent recycled plastics overall, including interior and exterior parts. It was also built in a factory powered by 100 percent climate-neutral electricity. Of Volvo's Tier 1 suppliers, 95 percent have committed to all renewable energy in their production by 2025. In addition to recycled plastic, it also uses denim, flax, and a wool-blend that contains around 70 percent recycled polyester in the cabin. Much of that is recycled from waste and scraps. Even Mitsubishi, who sells one of the smallest, most affordable and fuel-efficient non-hybrid on the market, is getting into the action. In March it started its latest three-year plan to first increase profit, but also reduce its global carbon footprint. The plan includes rolling out 16 models (including nine hybrids or battery electric vehicles), reducing emissions of greenhouse gases in order to help achieve carbon neutrality, investing a total of 210 billion yen by 2030 to procure 15 gigawatt-hours GWh of battery power and put more effort behind using assets unique to an automobile manufacturer (energy management, battery reuse, data sales, etc.). The company is currently part of the Renault-Nissan-Mitsubishi Alliance, which allows for shared product development, resource procurement, parts and manufacturing as a way of cutting costs. "In its recently announced Midterm Plan – 'Challenge 2025' – MMNA's parent company, Mitsubishi Motors Corporation (MMC), has committed to accelerating its efforts toward a sustainable carbon-neutral future, setting goals of 40 percent reduction in vehicle CO2 emissions and 50 percent reduction in operational CO2 emissions by 2030," Jeremy Barnes, senior director, communications and events at Mitsubishi told Newsweek. "Additionally, MMC has set targets for global sales of electrified vehicles at 50 percent by 2030 and 100 percent by 2035, leveraging a blend of plug-in hybrids (PHEV), hybrids (HEV) and pure electrics (BEV)." The company also noted the Mirage's fuel mileage (an Environmental Protection Agency-estimated 39 miles per gallon combined) and that the Mitsubishi Outlander Plug-in Hybrid was the world's first PHEV SUV, as well as being the world's best-selling PHEV SUV.

2023 Subaru Ascent Review: Safety, Capability Are Job One.
The three-row Subaru Ascent completed the adventure brand's SUV lineup in 2019. It has been updated regularly during its four-year lifespan, becoming more efficient and technology-forward as the years went on. The Subaru Ascent is on the receiving end a gentle refresh for the 2023 model year, with a new front fascia incorporating a more prominent grille; redesigned LED headlights and a more aggressive front bumper cover. The new bumper features air ducts to improve aerodynamics and efficiency. In back, the Ascent has updated taillights.
The 2023 Ascent is available in Base, Premium, Onyx Edition, Limited, and Touring trims, all featuring a 260-horsepower, 2.4-liter turbocharged four-cylinder engine. With Subaru's continuously variable transmission (CVT), it can tow up to 5,000 pounds with standard Trailer Stability Assist. Paddle shifters allow drivers to shift through stepped gear ratios. The CVT has never been better. When these types of transmissions first came out they were loud and always prioritized efficiency, gearing down to keep the engine at low rpms and igniting the fury of drivers who were annoyed by the lack of zippiness off the line. Now, automakers have found a balance, especially Nissan and Subaru, where the CVT can be efficient, but also aggressive if you give the car enough throttle. The Ascent feels quick from a standstill, though expressway passes take a few extra seconds. But, it was never annoyingly or dangerously slow and the Ascent is a big boy.Both the engine and transmission do get a little louder than a standard automatic transmission but the 25 miles per gallon highway rating is hard to beat in a three-row SUV. The standard mechanical brakes were also flawless with a good initial bite and smooth progression after that. The SUV is sprung softly on purpose and features 8.7 inches of ground clearance for going off road. The company's all-wheel drive system is excellent in dirt and with the new X-Mode driving mode it becomes even easier. That mode eases up the traction control and sends more power to all four wheels to make riding on, climbing over and descending dirt mounds much safer. Hill Descent Control keeps the vehicle at a chosen low speed when going down steep hills, using the brakes individually to keep the SUV straight. The cabin of the Ascent Onyx Edition tester came with a standard panoramic power moonroof with a power sunshade. A new option package added the 11.6-inch touchscreen infotainment screen with navigation. It also has a 12-way power-adjustable driver's seat with an adjustable seat cushion that makes it way more comfortable than flat-bottomed seats for long drives. This model has a manmade material on the seats, making them easy to clean. Additionally, the Ascent comes standard with tri-zone climate control, power locks, windows and mirrors as well as USB-a and USB-c ports for all types of smartphone. It has a total of 19 cupholders in its three rows. Wireless Apple CarPlay and Android Auto are standard and worked without fail. The cabin is laid out cleanly and the integration of the screen is well-positioned, keepijg the dashboard clear. Big air vents flank that screen along with a few hard climate control buttons, though most of the controls for heating and cooling are digital. The second-row captain's chairs slide and fold easily, but it takes a little more muscle than a child has. If those kids want to (or have to) sit in the third row with child seats it's also painless, unless they need help buckling. There's plenty of space for cargo with that third row folded down, though with it up there's just 17 cubic feet of space. However, it does have underfloor storage that can swallow a few small bags. New for this year, the standard rear vison camera includes a washer to ensure a clear view while backing up. The Ascent also has a ton of optional driver assist technologies like the Surround View Monitor and DriverFocus Distraction Mitigation System.
That system watched the driver's eyes to make sure they were on the road. It seemed a little too sensitive in our time with the vehicle. Sometimes even reading a street sign was enough to make it beep. On the other hand, distractions are many on the road today and its better to have it and not need it than need it and not have it. The seven- or eight-passenger 2023 Ascent starts at $34,395 before destination and handling. The most expensive Touring model has a base price of $48,696. It will split sales with other mildly rugged, midsize three-row SUVs like the Jeep Grand Cherokee L ($42,035), the Honda Pilot ($37,090) and Kia Telluride ($35,990). Both the Telluride and Grand Cherokee are more powerful, and have more interior space. The Pilot is slightly more efficient than the Ascent.
Both Subaru and Jeep are legendary for their four-wheel drive prowess. If there's dirt roads involved we'd suggest one of those two. If there are deep ruts, big rocks and fast-flowing water on the docket, you might to go all the way and get Jeep Wrangler. However, the Subaru Ascent can handle anything short of that.

2024 Mercedes-Maybach GLS 600 Review: As Luxurious as Ground Travel Gets.
There are only a few names that evoke as much luxury and opulence as Maybach. It was its own brand, created by the Maybach brothers in 1909, until it was scooped up by Daimler-Benz in 1960. Since then its name has been connected to Mercedes and now Maybach is now a sub-brand of the German marque, but that hasn't diluted its excellence. The 2024 Mercedes Maybach GLS 600 is the most expensive gas-powered vehicle you can buy on the Mercedes website without the letters AMG attached and with good reason. It features almost every bell and whistle the brand has imagined and brought to market to date. That starts with the exterior and its two-tone paint option. The SUV's grille features clean, vertical bars as the vertical tri-star logo and Maybach lettering complete the look. The air inlets feature a special Maybach pattern and a chrome surround. These elements are further complimented by a new optional 23 inch forged wheel in Maybach design with a forged wheel bolt cover. The new "Monoblock" wheels are also perfect but are a $6,000 option over the $174,350 base price of the 2024 Maybach GLS 600. The Maybach GLS is powered by a twin-turbocharged 4.0-liter V8 that makes 550 horsepower and 538 pound-feet of torque that is distributed to all four wheels. As opposed to an AMG model, the Maybach's startup noise is restrained, especially from the cabin, which is almost completely insulated from the outside world. With its softer suspension, the Maybach lifts its nose when taking off dives a bit when the brakes are applied, but that's all part of the expected cushy ride. In Sport driving mode the standard air suspension firms up, but it never gets anything close to harsh. The nine-speed automatic transmission works flawlessly in the background as does the all-wheel drive system. We did experience a little slush and snow during the test and the Maybach GLS was completely impervious. It's certainly not for tight, off-road trails, but in muddy fields, sandy hills and wide rocky roads the GLS would easily adapt. Once inside the cabin, after using the automatic folding step boards, it's the rear seats that get all of the attention. Instead of the standard three-row GLS, the Maybach has two bucket seats with a piano black (or wood patterned) center console with a control screen. The seats are cotton candy soft with headrest pillows and an extending footrest. Those rear thrones seem wasted on children, but they do have the LATCH system for booster seats. The front part of the cabin is almost as luxurious as the rear with a customizable digital instrument cluster and a touchscreen infotainment system under one pane of glass. It has a touchpad to control it, which is fortunate considering it's too far away to touch without leaning when driving. The leather-wrapped, heated and cooled seats have diamond stitching in the center panel. This tester had a white interior, with black trim and white pinstripes, but Mercedes offers dozens of leather, color and material combinations. Mercedes' massaging seat function is easy to access through buttons by the seat and one of the better systems available from premium automakers. The Energizing Comfort programs turn on the ventilated seats, massage functions, music, visuals and other comfort features in different themes like Freshness, Vitality, Joy and others to relax the driver. They run for ten minutes and though relaxing, are sometimes a little distracting with the lights and sounds and smells as it activates the vehicles perfume function in different scents. The cabin is as comfortable and as quiet as anything on the road, especially with the heated and massaging seats. The sound system from Burmester is excellent making live music sound live and podcasts sound crisp. The pinstripe pattern looks like a luxury yacht but piano black has drawbacks. Wood is the perfect choice. The interior ambient light bathes the cabin in any color the driver wishes, which will impress the kids, as will the rear-seat Wi-Fi enabled entertainment screens. The optional champagne cooler is less impressive children, more impressive for adults. Safety features including the usual emergency braking and adaptive cruise control, but Mercedes' assisted steering is one of the better systems on the market, acting almost imperceptibly in the background. It also stands out on the road, which is not an insignificant factor.
Competitors are few, which is the point of owning a Mercedes-Maybach GLS 600. The least expensive Bentley Bentayga starts under $200,000 but like this GLS quickly climbs past that. The other natural competitor is the Rolls-Royce Cullinan, though its base price of $374,000 more than doubles the cost of the GLS. The Bentayga is offered in hybrid, V8 and twelve-cylinder options; the Cullinan only comes with a twelve-cylinder. Any of those three in the driveway will set your house apart from others on the block, though Maybach buyers could still fly slightly under the radar as it could be confused for a regular Mercedes. There are advantages to keeping your wealth private while still being able to enjoy the perks.

Car Design is Rapidly Transforming Right Before Our Eyes.
There are more than 2 million electric vehicles (EVs) on the road today, which is enough to make them a regular feature in traffic whether a familiar- looking Tesla Model 3 or the wildly styled Toyota bZ4x. One of the things those two models, and the 100 or so other EVs on sale share is a break from traditional design. That's a big job for designers who are given the freedom to part with the past and try something new. It's also a responsibility, but it allows automakers to get creative, especially when coining a new brand name or division. There's never been a better opportunity to create a new design that becomes the next big thing. It all starts with the face of the vehicle. Traditionally that has meant eyes as the headlights and the grille as a wide smile. But as engines have advanced and transformed into electric motors they need less cooling, hence less grille. Lighting also plays a key role in the new era of design transformation. With new LED options almost any shape can be created, even a nod to a previous era with something like Hyundai's p ixel lights that look retro but are thoroughly modern. "So often the face of the car defines its character, its expression, its attitude - many traditional manufacturers have built their identities over many decades based upon a particular shape of grille. In many cases it has been one of the most recognizable design elements, making them instantly distinguishable from their competitors," Frank Stephenson, former McLaren, BMW, Alfa Romeo designer and current head of Frank Stephenson Design told Newsweek. "We have seen a trend in legacy automakers towards adapting their existing grille shape in other ways, in order to maintain or evolve the face of their brand, in some cases adopting a faux grille or graphic in its place." Stephenson notes that grille sizes are increasing despite the need for less cooling, and thinks it makes vehicles look too aggressive sometimes. He also said that it's easier for new brands who don't have an existing language or brand identity to come up with something radically new. Aldo Schurmann, design director for One One Labs, a transportation, automotive and product design headquartered in Lodz, Poland, explained that vehicle appearance today is influenced by our perception and general idea of technology. "New technologies should be different from the old ones, which is why they often choose a controversial appearance. This is a good trend because it allows companies with traditions to move away from established solutions in terms of aesthetics and gives room for experimentation," Schurmann told Newsweek. "In turn, new or unpopular producers have a chance to build a completely new relationship with customers, based on completely new values. The effect varies, but the process itself lets a lot of fresh air into the musty canon." Schurmann says there's not as much freedom as one might think. A vehicle still has the same layout as it always did with four wheels, windows and doors on the sides, lights at the front and rear. However, he agrees that consumers have become more open to new products, which gives designers more space to act.
"And that's great, although sometimes it takes us to quite strange places. A good example would be the center console of a car. Almost every vehicle has a huge display in this place. Hence, a lot of time is spent on designing what will appear in the very limited, flat space of the display and not around it, as was the case a few years ago. We don't judge whether it's bad, it's just a sign of the times," Schurmann said. "Part of good design is not only about beauty, but also how easy and intuitive the product is to use. To come out with a completely different 'car' could also mean reeducating consumers, and pioneering can lead to major success or major failure. This is a risk that not many want to take." One One Labs, a company that mainly works with startups, does sometimes hear "do something new" or even "design a car." He says even though that might sound like a dream come true, it comes with a specific set of obstacles. "When you realize that you have no point of reference, the ground starts to slip away from under your feet. You have to create something completely new, something that will probably become the basis for creating subsequent models and, preferably, iconic. You must do a lot of work to find this starting point and spend a lot of time to develop it into a form that resembles a vehicle in general," said Schurmann. Former GM designer Ed Wellburn, at this year's Detroit Concours d'Elegance, explained the challenges of the modern designer including how far they must be looking down the road. "It's hard to predict the future, and although designers are thinking about a car that's introduced today, they started work on it probably four or five years ago. So they have to sit there thinking five years in advance, plus the car will be in production for another five years. They've got to think about a car ten years in advance," said Wellburn. He also said that the architecture of electric vehicles give designers freedom to do new and interesting things. Whether those things will stand the test of time is another question. Stephenson says that the principles of good design don't change over time. Things like strong proportions and clean surfaces are timeless. He doesn't think people should have to "get used to" new designs. "A good design should always aim to have instant appeal. There are many designs that are new or shocking, but once that initial shock is gone, the design has little value. For many brands, electrification creates an opportunity to evolve their design language in a more drastic way. In some instances, we have seen the introduction of solely electric sub-brands, such as Polestar or Cupra, which allow traditional automakers to experiment in new segments, without affecting the parent brand," said Stephenson. He points to Polestar and Lucid as two brands using the new proportions of EVs to create exciting designs. He thinks we're going through a little bit of an identity crisis, styling cars like they still have engines and need exhaust pipes. Schurmann says a lot of the electric models like the Hyundai Ioniqs, Mercedes EQs and Polestars are interesting, but not quite unique. They still could be combustion engine vehicles. "The Cybertruck is unique. It's nasty but it breaks all conventions. A brilliant electric car that came out a couple of years ago is the Citroen Ami, a tiny city car so brilliant, with incredible solutions for both the consumer and the producer, however what makes this car great is not necessarily the fact that it is electric," Stepheson said. But it goes deeper than that."Often, along with the car, we buy an image of ourselves and this is crucial. We buy with our hearts and emotions. If we add a bit of 'wise choice' to this, we will have a recipe for success. Otherwise, any vehicle fulfilling basic functions could have the form of the simplest cube."

The 24 Vehicles To Look Forward to in 2024.
New product, increased sales and new technology are on the horizon for the auto industry in 2024. The year will be marked by big changes to some of the most venerable product lines and electric vehicle introductions that will shake up the landscape. Some of the models on this list have already been seen publicly. Others have made it onto the list based on information shared by industry experts with Newsweek. From super luxury to luxury to premium to mass market models, there's new vehicles coming to market that will offer something for everyone. Volvo's tiniest tot will make its way to U.S. shores in early 2024. The two-row, small SUV features an all-electric powertrain, an interior filled with sustainable materials, and enough electric power for the EX30 to comfortably serve as a daily driver for most anyone. Newsweek recently took a different electric Volvo on a 1,400-mile road trip. The Japanese automaker is finally giving the two-row midsize SUV a complete makeover in 2024. The model will retain its gasoline-powered propulsion and come with the company's latest technology, including advanced driver assistance and safety features. Expect to see the car at an auto show near you in the second half of the year. Honda's version of the Chevrolet Blazer EV will arrive in the first quarter of the year. The new Honda Prologue will be slightly wider than the Blazer EV and have a two-row layout. Buyers can get theirs with two- or all-wheel drive, offering up to 288 horsepower. The G-Wagen is getting a glow up. The model will be infused with new-age Mercedes technology and will keep its familiar shape. While a battery-electric version of the G-Class (EQG) is expected to come to market too, the company will keep some fossil fuel burning versions around for the EV adverse. BMW Group's MINI is giving the world an all-electric version of its Countryman model.The U.S. version of the car offers 313 horsepower at the press of the accelerator, and doesn't compromise on the characteristic MINI go kart-like handing capabilities. Plus, it has all-wheel drive. MINI promises that the model will arrive stateside in September. The new, all-electric Porsche Macan EV will be sold alongside the traditional Macan models for a while, but gives a glimpse of what the automaker has up its sleeve for performance-focused SUVs. Newsweek was recently invited to be one of the first to experience the model. Subaru's signature two-row SUV has gotten a streamlined generational makeover. It will arrive on streets in 2024, complete with the company's suite of advanced safety technology. The Forester will arrive as a 2025 model year vehicle in spring 2024. A new Nissan Armada is on the horizon following years of updates and freshened exterior design. The third generation of the three-row SUV is expected to be more technologically advanced than the current model, and feature modern aesthetics. The current-generation model has a high-horsepower NISMO offering in the Middle East. The long-awaited compact crossover from Chevrolet is nearly here. Based on the same Ultium battery-electric architecture that underpins the Chevrolet Blazer EV and Honda Prologue, the Equinox EV will have the hallmark qualities of the gasoline-powered Equinox, but run only on electrons. The third member of Polestar's family will come to U.S. driveways from the company's production line in South Carolina. The launch edition, which goes on sale in early 2024, starts at nearly $84,000. For that buyers get a long-range model with all-wheel drive and up to 300 miles of all-electric range. Earlier this year, Lincoln unveiled a completely redesigned version of its Nautilus SUV that earned comparisons to Land Rover models. It includes a windscreen-wide high-tech display, fresh looks, and an interior that moves the Lincoln luxury story forward. It will be on sale this spring. Ford has taken years tuning its new-generation Ranger midsize truck to North American standards. The off-road-centric model will make its market debut in the first half of 2024 giving new versions of the Toyota Tacoma, Chevrolet Colorado and GMC Canyon stiff competition. The off-roading world has been waiting for this one for a long time. The new Lexus GX is a combination of comfort, aggressive styling and off-road prowess. The automaker will start selling the SUV in the first half of 2024. ZDX is Acura's answer to the Honda Prologue. The vehicles will be nearly identical underneath, but the Acura will be sold in a Type S high-performance variant that delivers an estimated 500 horsepower. It can go up to 325 miles without needing a charge. It will be on sale in early 2024. The Infiniti QX80 is arguably the most important model the automaker has on its roster. The flagship three-row SUV is expected to show a new level of sophistication, propelling Infiniti forward after years of brand story stagnation, with the exception of the QX60 midsize SUV. Valhalla has been promised for a long time, and 2024 is when the company will finally deliver on its multi-million-dollar hypercar. Aston Martin has designed the car using lesson learned from Formula 1 and Aston's previous Valkyrie supercar, ensuring it is track-ready for the exclusive club of drivers that can afford it. The last member of Toyota's off-road universe is expected to get a redo in 2024. It will follow on the heels of the Lexus GX, and Toyota Land Cruiser, Tacoma and Tundra and likely carry over many of the design, drive and handling characteristics. Look for it in the second-half of the year. Volvo's flagship electric SUV will be on sale globally before it comes to North America, but it will arrive at U.S. dealerships in 2024. The SUV will be built alongside the Polestar 3 in South Carolina, and have a range of around 300 miles. Its starting price is a smidge over $76,000, making it far less expensive than the Polestar 3. The all-electric take on Volkswagen's iconic Bus has been sold overseas for years. Americans have been patiently waiting, and the wait is almost over. The retro-inspired model has all the design quirks and coloring of the original, with the company's new-age battery-electric powertrain. Look for it in the second half of 2024. The new Mazda CX-70 will slot between the smaller CX-50 and larger CX-90 in the company's lineup. It is expected to be a luxe, midsize take on the typical Mazda SUV, which means it should be ergonomically sound, offer a connected drive experience and have a cabin swathed in upscale materials. Mazda is expected to unveil the car early in the year. AMG combined the C- and E-class to create this high-horsepower machine. The model sports a wide body style and design characteristic that make it look fierce and fast, even while sitting still. First drives and deliveries of the model are coming next year. Ford is expected to update its aging Explorer this spring. The sixth-generation model will get fresh technology and looks, bringing it in line with the rest of the Ford lineup before the next generation comes to market a few years from now. Hyundai's fresh take on its hot-selling SUV moves the model from mass market good to stylishly interesting. Its boxy shape and baked-in off-road prowess tick many boxes for Americans who simply want a trail-ready SUV that can haul around their family and stuff on pavement during the week.

Hyundai Funding World War II Wreck Site Dives to Clean Oceans.
Heathly Seas, a company focused on keeping Earth's oceans clean, estimates that 640,000 tons of fishing gear are lost or abandoned annually in the world's seas and oceans, which leads to the needless suffering of millions of marine animals. To help, the company schedules and participates in scuba dives to retrieve trash, which is eventually upcycled into something new. Hyundai Motor Company, as part of its "Progress for Humanity" vision, entered its third year of partnership with the Dutch company, and just finished its third major dive to retrieve plastics, nylon and metals from the ocean. The latest mission took place in the Mediterranean Sea where volunteer divers from five countries removed nearly one ton of old fishing nets, cages and other gear. The Hyundai car brand plans to create shared across its brands value by building a sustainable business ecosystem. "The pursuit of shared values requires the existence of both social and business values. Our partnership with Healthy Seas is one way we realize the creation of such values," Hyundai told Newsweek. "For social value, we have marine ecosystem restoration by removing ghost nets, educational school programs to help children learn about the importance of keeping our oceans clean, and collaborations with fishermen to prevent fishing nets from ending up in the ocean or landfills." "For business value, Heathy Seas reclaims fishing nets and other nylon waste to convert into ECONYL, a regenerated nylon yarn used to make new products. Hyundai Ioniq 5 and 6 customers can order floor mats made of ECONYL. Recycling also reduces carbon emissions during the manufacturing process," Hyundai said. The latest Healthy Seas dive at a World War II shipwreck was an unusual site for gear removal, as it still contained several aerial bombs and vehicles. However, historical wrecks like this are important for the marine ecosystem. The dive team took eight days and in addition to other trash, removed a 1,500-pound net that exposed more of the ship's structure, making it safer for fish and coral. An earlier mission was held at Tossa de Mar, a highly polluted marine area in Costa Brava, Spain. Eight volunteer divers removed a large gill net covering a reef within the boundaries of a marine protected area. Healthy Seas says that despite being lightweight, gill nets are the most lethal form of marine litter, and that it rescues many organisms from them during the dives. The debris is then sorted on land where the nylon nets will be used by a company called Aquafil, together with other nylon waste, to create synthetic ECONYL to be used in Hyundai Motor Group's products. "A company communicates with its customers through its products and services. As such, we aspire to provide our customers with products that are responsible. Through sustainability partnerships, we contribute by restoring ecosystems and reducing carbon emission during the manufacturing process," a Hyundai spokesperson said. t's not just Hyundai brand, Hyundai Motor Group, including Kia and luxury arm Genesis are also doing their parts to help the ocean. Last year Kia began a seven-year partnership with The Ocean Cleanup. The Netherlands-based non-profit organization is developing technologies to get plastic out of the world's oceans. The Ocean Cleanup removes what's already there and creates systems to stop the plastic in rivers from flowing into the ocean. Kia is supporting the The Ocean Cleanup financially and taking some of the harvested plastics to use in future Kias. "The Ocean Cleanup Partnership is part of Kia's 'Cleaner and Circular' initiative to realize Kia's ESG vision of "Sustainable Movement for an Inspiring Future". It is a cleaner activity that benefits the ecosystem by creating a clean sea through the collection of marine waste plastics, and also circular activity that prevents waste plastics from returning to nature or being wasted," a Kia representative told Newsweek. The Genesis brand's ocean sustainability initiative is product driven. It is developing materials and finishes that are more sustainable overall. In the Genesis GV60 some interior fabrics are made from up to 15% recycled polyethylene terephthalate (PET) and nylon yarn. This comes from recycled fish nets among other sources.
Buying a Car at the End of the Year? Here's What You Need to Know.
The end of the year has traditionally been a time for steep discounts on dealership lots, many from luxury manufacturers but also a handful of others. So many Americans wait until the end of the year or first of the next year to buy that sales in December and January are traditionally 9- to 18-percent higher than average those months. In December brands and dealerships are motivated to not just meet monthly sales volume targets but also end-of-year expectations in order to gain access to hefty bonuses. That means that December is a good time to buy, especially the week between Christmas and New Year's Day, which has the highest daily selling rate for vehicles compared to any other week throughout the year. Additionally, next year's models will already be on the lot, allowing for better deals on current models, especially ones that are being redesigned or discontinued. "While most brands implement December sales programs, it's important to note that most discounts run through the industry sales close day of January 2. Therefore, you don't have to worry about sacrificing your New Year's Eve celebration to finalize the deal on a new vehicle," Tony Salerno, managing director and practice leader of automotive, advisory and analytics at J.D. Power told Newsweek. "Almost all brands offer sales incentives towards the end of the year, but December stands out as the primary sales event season for luxury brands." The final month of the year is also big for SUVs, pickups, and vans weighing over 6,000 pounds because of tax deductions and bonus depreciation. Salerno explained that if you purchase a qualifying SUV worth $50,000 for your sole proprietorship business before the year's end, the potential tax deduction could be as high as $40,000. "However, it's crucial to consult with your tax advisor before making the decision," Salerno says. Seasonal trends have changed over the last year, demand has softened, and new car inventories have improved enough to where dealers will be more willing to offer good discounts on the sticker price. "Take a closer look at cash incentives versus low-APR incentives – you might be surprised at what's best for you: In a rising rate environment, low-APR deals will be beneficial for many buyers. Yet, for those buyers able to make higher down payments and pay over fewer years, cash incentives can deliver more total value than lower rates," Mark Pregmon, VP of Consumer Lending at USAA told Newsweek. "Calculate the true cost of ownership: The average payment on a new car in the U.S. is still above $700, per Experian data. Meanwhile, gas prices continue to be in flux and the cost of insurance is on the rise. Factoring in these needs, along with maintenance costs, will help guide you on what's accessible for your budget and avoid any surprises." Pregmon also says that if you need to lower your monthly payments a longer-term loan is also an option. Those interest rates are higher, but they do reduce the monthly cost of ownership. Notably, in 2024 the IRS plans to broaden access to the tax benefit when buying an electric vehicle. Purchasers will be able to use the credit to lower their tax bill or use it at the dealership to directly reduce the price of the car when making the purchase. "However, purchasing an electric vehicle before the new year may carry several advantages. The current tax credit, which can be up to $7,500, is set to undergo changes in 2024. The list of eligible vehicles may shrink due to anticipated IRS rules excluding certain vehicles. If a buyer has a certain type of vehicle in mind, they may want to buy before the changes take effect," Alison Flores, J.D., manager, The Tax Institute at H&R Block told Newsweek. It's also worth noting that these considerations do not apply to leases and that businesses that lease clean vehicles to consumers may qualify for a commercial clean vehicles credit. Flores explained that the rules for commercial clean vehicles differ from the rules for the clean vehicle credit available for consumers. "The commercial clean vehicle credit does not have an AGI (adjusted gross income) limit on buyer eligibility, North American assembly requirement or a maximum vehicle price. Whether a taxpayer can claim the qualified commercial clean vehicle credit in its business depends on who is the owner of the vehicle for federal income tax purposes," said Flores. Finally, used electric vehicles also qualify for a tax credit, up to $4,000, but it's limited to 30 percent of the vehicle's purchase price and can be claimed once every three years. This does have an AGI cap of $150,000 for Married Filing Jointly and Qualifying Surviving Spouse, $112,500 for Head of Household, and $75,000 for all other taxpayers. Additionally, the vehicle's sale price must not exceed $25,000, and it has to be at least two years old.

Lucid's New All-Electric Gravity SUV Is a Sustainability Champion.
Sustainability goes beyond zero tailpipe emissions. It extends to the way a car is designed and the materials that those parts are constructed from. The new Lucid Gravity battery-electric sport utility vehicle (SUV) was designed to be an environmental champion. In addition to cutting down on the amount of brightwork in the Gravity compared to what is in the Lucid Air sedan, Derek Jenkins, senior vice president of design and brand at Lucid told Newsweek that the company is utilizing more sustainable materials throughout the cabin, like wood. "All the wood has either been sustainably grown on a farm or we're using what would normally be wasted wood, and we're putting it into composite forms," he said. While some automakers refuse to change over to "vegan" interiors reasoning that there's nothing more sustainable than harvesting a hide from a natural born cow, Lucid is taking a different approach, offering customers new options in the Gravity. "Yosemite and Mojave are non leather interiors. Everything is done using recycled fiber woven fabrics. We have a higher percentage of woven fabrics in this car than we did with Air. Bringing more fabrics into the interior, there's a big win there," Jenkins said. Gravity, which has up to three rows of seating, wears just one carpet color and that carpet is made of 100 percent recycled fiber content. Gravity was designed as a "wellness space", the company says, using wording to similar to how Bentley characterizes the Bentayga. Jenkins is conscious of the balance between materials and perception, nothing that Lucid customers are paying for a luxury level product and have high expectations. "All of that comes back to the supplier and how we can make the most out of that connection with the supplier to get get these things optimized and make them work without sacrificing from the consumer standpoint. I don't want the interior to feel plasticky. I always want a good, and then a tactile feel throughout the interior. There's always this give and take.
Finding the right material is a balance between expectations, supplier materials availability and cost. "Some of the things that [suppliers] come to us with are more coarse by nature, and they just don't feel inviting, like a nice couch. And then you push the suppliers to get a finer weave. It's still fully recycled, but it just feels better to the touch. So, finding that balance that the consumer is going to pick up on is really, really important." Lucid isn't the only automaker taking things up a sustainability notch in the cabin. As Kia was pushing toward premium with its new EV9 electric SUV, the company opted to explore similar themes.As sustainability becomes even more of a talking point, experts see the trend toward greener materials continuing, and expanding to become major talking points of vehicle construction, exactly how MINI referenced lifecycle design during the introduction of its new Cooper and Countryman SE ALL4 earlier this year.
I Test Drove a Kia EV9 Without Ever Being on a Road.
Inside a non-descript historic brick building in Seongsu-dong, Seoul, Kia EV Unplugged Ground welcomes EV9 curious buyers to a new type of showroom that combines cutting edge technology with the traditions of the car buying experience. There's no glistening facades, waving blowups or neon here. Aside from the EV9 parked out front and the understated natural material sign that announces its presence in the district, Unplugged Ground is an easy fit into its surrounds. Stepping inside is another story. Walking into the modern building beside the brick one, I was greeted by a worker as a traditional customer would and he offered to give my friend and I a tour of the vehicle. Right off the bat, I could tell that this was not going to be a typical tour; no one stepped out from the desk to give me a hard sell on the EV9. Instead, he told me that the tour would start at a door in the back of the room at a predetermined time. Until then, I was welcome to play around with the racing simulators that had been modified for Kia vehicles or visit the on-site café. The simulators were fun, of course, but they were far from an authentic driving experience. Think older versions of Mario Kart, but harder and with far less natural responsiveness. There were also static versions of the EV9 to explore on our own. When it was time for the tour, my friend and I stepped into a hallway that had digitized displays on either side. The animations changed as the tour guide read from a script, in Korean. After a few minutes, when he was done, the doors to a larger, dark area opened and the real show began. Ahead of us sat an EV9 with animations washing over it. Faux fog and the EV9's own exterior illumination put on a show with dramatic effect. It was easy to get a sense of EV9 talking points from the animations as the tour guide continued to read from the script. For example, as he spoke about seating, the seating configurations were shown on illuminated panels above the model, in line with where the seats are in the car. After a few minutes there, we were ushered to a wall that allowed us to use the shifter dial from a Kia model to select the features we wanted to learn about. Then, it was time to hop behind the wheel of an EV9. Instead of a shell or a model version of the three-row SUV, Kia has installed a full EV9 in its showroom, surrounded by simulator technology that would allow for the real fun to begin. I was up first. Having already driven the SUV across Korea earlier this year, I was familiar with the various controls I'd be utilizing as I "drove". I expected the screens to move and perhaps the undercarriage would jostle like what I've experienced in too many automaker safety and driver-assistance technology simulators to mention. It did not, it went far further. The simulation takes place in an extended reality-based space that mixes augmented reality and virtual reality to immerse users. As the car "rolled" down the "road" the connected experience between the driver, car and simulator screen was elegantly natural. Steering, signaling, accelerating and braking were the same in the virtual world as they were in the real world. The SUV showed off its abilities with Highway Driving Assistant 2 and Remote Smart Parking Assistant driver-assistance technologies as well. With all views from the driver's seat occupied by enormous screens, it was easy to get lost in the simulated environment Kia created. Hills, highways, stop lights and passing all felt very similar to how they would in real life, without the obvious sight and sound distractions that a full-on test drive would allow. The car moved from side to side, turning around corners and exiting the "highway" in a fashion that did not allow the actual vehicle I was in to sit still. It reacted much like model on the road would, giving a very near real life behind-the-wheel experience. My expectations were low, and they should not have been. Not only does this customer-side simulator blow other similar technologies out of the water, it makes clear what the true ride and ownership experience of the EV9 would be like. It serves as a suitable alternative to a traditional test drive and it can be argued that the simulator is nearly just as good. After the journey was over, we let EV9 behind and were welcomed into a serene space to touch and see the sustainable materials that Kia has installed in the EV9. This environment is as much about education as it is as picking the perfect blend of aesthetics for creating the package your perfectly equipped EV9. At the end of the experience, there was no heavy sales pitch, no pressure to "get into a Kia today". Is this the future of test drives? A neat gimmick? Perhaps the answer is "yes" to both. As automobile sales turn into an increasingly digital process, the traditional dealership model is due for a revitalization like the simulator can provide. Kia is bringing a version of the simulator to the U.S. for CES in January. With artificial intelligence and virtual reality experiences on the tip of attendees' tongues, the simulator should be on the list of must-do exhibits for attendees.

Range Rover, Alfa Romeo Promise New Electric SUVs Are Coming Next Year.
Land Rover and Alfa Romeo are ready to dip their toes in the battery-electric vehicle (BEV) market, with both brands teasing new all-electric SUVs for next year. They already sell plug-in hybrid electric vehicles (PHEVs). These fresh models will be both brands' first attempt at a BEV and part of larger promises about fully electrified lineups by the end of the decade. The similarities end there as Alfa's entry promises to be small and affordable and made for the city centers of Europe. The Range Rover will be large, for affluent buyers and made for daily drives and the occasional rocky trail. Alfa Romeo's first fully electric SUV has been named Milano, the Italian word for the city of Milan, Italy, where Alfa Romeo was founded. The car was teased today in new photographs and will be officially revealed in April of 2024 before going on sale that September. The new Alfa Romeo Milano will slot below both the plug-in hybrid Tonale crossover and the larger Giulia SUV as a "B-segment" subcompact model. It will be equivalent in size to the Chevrolet Trax and Hyundai Kona. The Milano will use the same platform as the Jeep Avenger, which was built specifically for Europe. It is unlikely that the vehicle will be sold in North America, experts say. Like the Jeep, the Milano will ride Stellantis's e-CMP architecture and be built at the same factory in Poland. Expect it to share motors and batteries as well. The Alfa Romeo CEO Jean-Philippe Imparato did say it will be more sporty than the Jeep focusing on handling and agility. According to reports it will first be available as pure electric vehicle (EV), and then as a mild hybrid with a small gasoline engine. Alfa's CEO said the Milano will debut with four-wheel drive only and that only the electric version will be available in the United Kingdom. Other versions will be sold alongside the BEV elsewhere. Imparato also said it would be priced a little higher than the Jeep Avenger, which befits the brand's premium positioning and similar to how the Dodge Hornet is positioned compared to the Tonale. The Milano will be up against other subcompacts like the new Volvo EX30 and MINI Countryman. The Alfa boss also did not rule out a Quadrifoglio version of the Milano. As part of the vehicle introduction, Alfa Romeo, owned by Stellantis since 2021, clarified its EV strategy going forward. The plan is tagged as "from zero to zero," meaning it wants to go from zero electrified vehicles to a lineup with zero emissions in 2027. In 2025 Alfa Romeo will unveil its first vehicle exclusively available as an EV. By 2027 its whole lineup will be 100 percent electric. The new Land Rover Range Rover Electric promises everything buyers expect from a gasoline-powered Range Rover, and more. It will come equipped with more than 33 inches of water fording capability, four-wheel drive and active noise cancellation and deliver a comfortable ride. Land Rover says it plans to file more patents for the new EV than any SUV before. The new Range Rover will use the company's MLA platform that also underpins mild-hybrid and plug-in hybrid Range Rovers, and will be built alongside them in Solihull, England. It will also have 800-volt electrical architecture, the same level that underpins the Kia EV9 and Hyundai Ioniq lineup. Range Rover says that a year of virtual development of the model has been completed and that the first physical vehicles have been built. They're currently testing in hot and cold weather in Dubai and Sweden. The company also said that because the SUV is its first fully electric vehicle it aims to ensure the toughness of the electric drive system, "including its underfloor, battery durability, chassis integrity and vehicle dynamics tests for thermal derating." Powertrain issues have traditionally plagued Land Rover models, including Range Rovers. Range Rover has opened a waiting list for future buyers on its website.
Cadillac Now Has an EV To Replace Every Gas-powered SUV It Sells.
The Cadillac electric quintet is complete. With the debut of its Vistiq battery-electric sport utility vehicle (SUV), Cadillac has revealed its complete plan for overhauling its current gasoline-powered SUV lineup for fresh electric vehicles (EVs). The 2026 Cadillac Vistiq will slot between the Escalade IQ and the Lyriq, the automaker said in a press release. That size spot is currently occupied by the XT6. The XT6 is expected to be replaced by the Vistiq like the XT5 by the Lyriq and XT4 by the Optiq. However, that transition might not be as cleanly delineated as previously expected. General Motors CEO Mary Bara has indicated that the company is adjusting its electric vehicle business plan to better meet market demands. This could indicate side-by-side model production for an unspecified length of time until the Vistiq is expected to be the size of the current XT6 with three-rows and a squared-off body. Like the recently revealed Optiq SUV, Cadillac only confirmed the existence of the vehicle and that details, including available features and pricing, will be released next year. "Vistiq adds another compelling EV to revealed Optiq SUV, Cadillac, reinforcing our commitment to an electric future," said John Roth, vice president of Global Cadillac in a press release. "Our brand now has an EV entry in most luxury segments, offering customers a range of choices, and Cadillac EVs will cover most luxury SUV segments across critical global markets in the next two years." "The big challenge for Cadillac now as for the rest of GM is actually executing on the vision for EVs and getting customers to buy these vehicles. While GM has shown some intriguing designs, actually manufacturing and delivering on any of these new EVs has been very problematic so far and the engineering of its big trucks and SUVs has been questionable," Sam Abuelsamid, principal analyst for transportation and mobility at Guidehouse Insights told Newsweek when the Optiq was revealed. He also said that GM as a whole has its work cut out for it. All of the brands need to demonstrate that they can reliably build EVs in volume and engineer them to be fully competitive with other brands in the segment. The three-row Cadillac Vistiq will compete with other three-row EVs like the Kia EV9, which starts at about $56,000. It's a little smaller than the Mercedes-Benz EQS SUV, which is much more expensive at $104,000. The Rivian R1S SUV could also be cross-shopped at $78,000 as well as the Tesla Model X and forthcoming Volvo EX90.

Chinese Automakers Are Knocking on America's Door.
Chinese automakers are preparing to come on-shore in America. Companies including BYD and Nio have promised to begin delivering vehicles to U.S. customers in the coming years. The COVID-19 pandemic and market conditions have pushed some automakers' North American market launch plans into the later half of this decade. There is no doubt that the marketplace is tough, even for brands that have been established for decades in the country. Volkswagen, Alfa Romeo, Fiat, Mitsubishi and Mazda continue to struggle to gain market share. American automakers, including the foreign ones that build locally, will be forced to adjust to the influx of new brands and increased competition. And, all parties will be held to the restrictions and incentives that are a result of the Inflation Reduction Act. It comes at a time when the Chinese automotive market is on the rise. China's national automakers are expected to outsell foreign automakers for the first time this year in the country, capitalizing on a decline in sales by American-owned General Motors and Ford Motor Company. Additionally, the country's auto industry now leads in global exports for the first time, according to global consulting firm Alix Partners Global Automotive Outlook, beating rivals like Germany and Japan. The Chinese auto market is massive, moving more than 23 million new vehicles in 2022 versus the 14 million sold in the United States. China offers massive tax breaks for EVs, with the government spending $28 billion on subsidies from 2009 to 2022, according to China Dialogue, an independent, non-profit that focuses on the country's climate and environment news. Chinese automakers who import their models to the U.S. for sale have those models subject to a 25 percent import tariff that was put into place during the Trump administration. This is on top of the standard 2.5 percent import tariff that applies to vehicles made outside of the country. Electric vehicle batteries made in countries outside the U.S. are subject to their own set of tariffs. Additionally, the Chinese models and their buyers would be further disincentivized as they would not be eligible for the full breadth of the tax incentives created as a result of Inflation Reduction Act rule making. "For GM and Ford to succeed in China nowadays - a complete lineup of EVs (including hybrids) that are (technologically) feature rich and priced competitively with their product development folks marching out new products and features every six to nine months. Even mighty Tesla has failed to keep up with 'China EV Inc.' and need price cuts to keep the metal moving," Tu Le of Sino Auto Insights, an analyst firm based in Beijing, told Newsweek. Many Chinese automakers are already tied to America through joint ventures and technology co-sharing, including three of the largest four. Dongfeng Motor Corporation operates a joint venture with Stellantis. Changan has agreements with Ford and Mazda. SAIC (Shanghai Automotive Industry Corporation) has ventures with Buick, Chevrolet and Volkswagen. "China's homegrown brands have been laser-focused on integrating CASE into vehicles at attractive price points and at a faster pace than traditional automakers," said Mark Wakefield, global co-leader of the automotive and industrial practice at AlixPartners in the report referring to connected, autonomous, shared-mobility, electric/electrified technologies. "To compete, automotive companies need to become 'New Tech'-driven and adopt a challenger mindset with the risk appetite of a start-up company," he said. Chinese companies seem to do better at meeting their customer needs quickly, the report found, while American companies are engineering-driven and have difficulty leaving traditional product-development processes behind. They are too cautious when bringing new technology to market and overspend on things today's customers don't highly value, the report concluded. AlixPartners found that Chinese EV brands have 11 percentage points higher penetration of advanced driver-assistance systems than their non-Chinese counterparts in the highest-volume mid-range price segment in China. Chinese EVs also get revamped more often, 1.3 years in the market, compared to 4.2 years for non-China brands with mostly internal combustion offerings. Some companies are changing the way they operate to be more in line with the Chinese automaker product cycle, introducing major updates every few years rather than a new generation every seven to eight years. Genesis has done this with its G90 sedan and the first generation of the Porsche Macan has been updated three times in nine years, and will continue to be alongside the new Macan EV when it comes to market in 2024. Chinese vehicles have historically underperformed in crash tests, including Europe's NCAP testing. This is no longer the case. In 2023, nine Chinese-branded vehicles scored the highest marks possible, five-stars, in the test. Cars made in China are already utilizing the vehicle-to-infrastructure technology (V2X) that is masking its way into the American market. V2X allows road signs, construction zones and first responder technology to directly interact with vehicles via their in-car operating system to warn them of roadworks, traffic, and hazards. Coming to America isn't an easy path. Toyota, Kia, Hyundai, Nissan and Honda have had to forage paths and their brands took decades to gain wide acceptance. Le thinks its unwise to equate Chinese EVs entering the U.S. market now with what the Japanese and Koreans did in the past. "That's not going to be the case for Chinese EVs. I've driven dozens of these vehicles and many of EVs sold in China would sell in the U.S. market today, especially if politics are set aside. They are designed well and well-built and I anticipate that they would undercut US built EVs once they enter en masse, hence the tariff," he said. There are few brands that are poised for success here, including BYD and Geely. BYD has only a small connection with the U.S., Geely a much bigger one. BYD, one of the two largest privately-owned automakers in China along with Geely, is one of the most interested in the U.S. market. It has already made inroads across the world in Norway, Australia, Britain, Brazil and more. It operates a bus and truck factory in Lancaster, California, where it also makes batteries. Notably, the company is backed by Warren Buffett's Berkshire Hathaway firm. "BYD has been the best kept secret until recently. It's the company that Charlie Munger convinced [Warren] Buffet to invest $225 million way back in 2008. It is a machine. They are vertically integrated and fab their own chips and build their own batteries, enough of them to rank number two with about 16 percent of global battery market share," Le said. "BYD also sells those same batteries to American companies like Ford and Tesla. In fact, they supply the battery cells for the China-built Ford Mustang Mach-E. It will sell 3.5 million battery-electric and plug-in hybrid vehicles combined in 2023. They'll outsell Tesla this year and the VW brand in the China market for the first time ever. Over the last three years, they've entered more than 55 countries." Le also said American automakers should also be keeping an eye out for some of the Geely brands: Zeekr, Polestar, Volvo and Lotus, but says that having American ties isn't especially significant. China already knows the importance of the U.S. market, the second largest in the world. He expects 10 to 15 more brands to enter the U.S. market over the next several years joining the current joint ventures. The Geely-owned Polestar, Volvo and Lotus are not only sold here, the brands are also investing heavily in U.S. manufacturing. Earlier this year, Polestar said it would move production of its 2 sedan to South Carolina, joining the 3 SUV and Volvo EX90 SUV starting in 2024. "Localized production is more critical than ever, particularly in the growing electric vehicle sector. Geely was an early Chinese auto giant to produce vehicles in the U.S., and it is taking a tactical approach to increasing U.S. production beyond a single car — Volvo's S60 sedan," Paul Waatti, manager of industry analysis at AutoPacific told Newsweek. He explained that Geely's decision is a strategic response to the evolving U.S. electric vehicle market, encompassing business efficiencies, regulatory compliance, adherence to federal incentives, market positioning, consumer perception, and aligning with global strategic objectives crucial for success in the competitive and growing U.S. EV sector. "First, China EV Inc isn't coming, they are here. The Polestar 2 is currently shipped from China to the US market. Tesla is shipping Shanghai built Model Ys to Canada. And although not an EV, GM ships the Shanghai built Buick Envision to the US market as well. There will be more, from both Chinese automakers and non-Chinese automakers," said Le.

2024 Chevrolet Blazer EV Review: Power, Options Abound.
Chevrolet is experiencing its highest rate of loyalty ever at the moment, making it a great time to introduce new vehicles. The launch of the 2024 Chevrolet Blazer EV battery-electric sport utility vehicle (SUV) capitalizes on that timing. SUVs are a 64-percent slice in the EV sales pie and Chevy expects that share to continue. The General Motors brand wants a large swath of current Equinox and Blazer gasoline drivers, as well as people driving competitors like the the Ford Mustang Mach-E, Hyundai Ioniq 5 and others to convert to electric power without giving up the things they like about their current models. The best thing about the 2024 Chevy Blazer EV is choice. Buyers are able to choose from a variety of trim levels, powertrains, paint colors, safety technology and comfort and convenience features in more combinations than the average EV allows. In this way, it's very similar to a "normal" car. Like many Chevrolets, the Blazer EV is offered in LT, RS and SS trim levels, each with a slightly different character. The LT features a monochromatic appearance and 19-inch wheels. The RS model gains black accents on the grille and elsewhere, along with standard 21-inch wheels. The high performance SS model is the most aggressive with a third unique grille, two-tone color scheme with a black roof and 22-inch wheels. The all-wheel drive (AWD) Blazer RS EV is available now at dealerships nationwide. The Blazer 2LT AWD and RS rear-wheel drive will follow in the coming weeks. The Blazer SS and less-expensive front-wheel drive models will launch in the coming months, according to Chevrolet. The new Blazer electric SUV is one of the few vehicles to be offered with all three options for drivetrain. There are two battery sizes, 85 kilowatt (kW) and 102 kW, leading to ranges of 279 miles for all-wheel drive Blazers and 324 miles for rear-drive options. Chevrolet hasn't revealed the range of the front-wheel drive model yet. Blazer comes with an 11.5-kW onboard AC charging module for at-home charging and public charging. It has a high-speed DC public fast-charging capability of up to 190 kW, recharging 78 miles of all-electric range in about 10 minutes. The front lighting conveys the state of charge while the vehicle charges. It increases in speed and intensity as the battery's charge increases. The 2024 Blazer's cabin is huge with a massive trunk for cargo, even without the rear seats folded down. Those rear seats will also easily fit a 6-foot person behind another 6-foot person in front. Three child or booster seats could fit in the second row as well. The rocket booster theme is strong here, going even further than the Chevy Camaro with red accented, round climate vents with fluting that almost looks like fire. It looks especially cool with those accents in the sun where they reflect and shine a bit. The Blazer EV still has physical controls for climate and volume, though there are redundant and permanent climate icons the touchscreen too. That central touchscreen infotainment system measures 17.7-inches and is connected to an 11-inch digital driver instrument cluster on all trims. A head-up display, the rear camera mirror surround vision, the auto sense power liftgate and heated wipers are optional. Google Built-in is standard but Apple CarPlay is not available. One day of driving wasn't enough to get used to the system, which doesn't seems as straightforward as the Apple CarPlay interface but can be used with voice control. That big dual-screen setup is standard across the Blazer EV lineup. The seats are perforated suede (in the rear-drive RS) or faux leather (in the AWD RS) and feature color accents either in the stitching or on the panels, though they're surprisingly stiff for this type of vehicle. However, taller bolsters do help when winding through mountain roads at speed, keeping the driver firmly in place. Super Cruise, GM's hands-free, eyes-up assisted driving software will be available next year. The system is standard on the Blazer SS and optional on RS and LT models. Elsewhere in safety, the Blazer will also come with expected features such as emergency braking, forward collision alert, following distance indicator (which is more useful than it sounds), lane keep assist and departure warning. The Blazer EV RS with rear-wheel drive is the lineup's middle model. It offers up to 340 horsepower (hp) and is expectedly quick from a standstill and plenty powerful when already cruising. But, both the brake pedal and regeneration are exceptionally heavy. The regeneration is adjustable between off, low and high. The highest mode regenerates the most energy, but does throw the driver's and passenger's head forward when jumping off the throttle. Tour, Sport, Snow/Ice and My Mode driving modes adjust the steering effort, throttle, brakes and Jetson's like acceleration sound, though the suspension is fixed in each model. Regardless, the Blazer EV is one of the more comfortable electric SUVs on the market today. Despite the 21-inch wheels, it thuds smoothly and quietly over small bumps and rolls completely over bigger potholes with those giant tires. In Sport mode the rear-drive Blazer RS EV seems to love those twisting roads in the mountains near San Diego, especially alongside heavy regeneration. It allows a different kind of control than a standard two-pedal, gas-brake setup. A driver can accelerate hard around corners, and then pull back on the accelerator a little bit to slow for the next corner and then shove it back down for the next straight section. Though heavy on the scales around 5,500 pounds, the Blazer feels lighter during spirited driving. As with all EVs, the low center of gravity is key for handling. The Blazer is planted around curves and doesn't lean. It also stays more level than expected when braking and accelerating hard. We also tested the all-wheel drive electric Blazer. Together the two motors deliver 288 horsepower and though it didn't feel as quick as the RS RWD model, it was perfectly suited to getting up to and staying at expressway speeds. Chevy says the RS AWD model has a zero-to-sixty time of about 6 seconds, the rear-wheel drive RS hits the mark in 5 seconds and the forthcoming SS will go the same distance in under 4 seconds. The 2024 Chevrolet Blazer RS all-wheel drive is on sale now for $60,215; the 2LT AWD, also on sale now, is $56,715 before destination and taxes, as well as EV tax credits. The front-wheel drive Blazer 2LT launches next year with a price less than $50,000, according to Chevy and the RS rear-wheel drive with the bigger electric motor is $61,790. The Blazer isn't one of the top sellers in the midsize segment, that space is occupied by the Jeep Grand Cherokee and Hyundai Santa Fe. However, being a recognizable name in a sea of new electric options might prove an advantage in the current climate, especially with its high brand loyalty.

New US Dinosaur That Lived Just Before Mass Extinction Revealed.
Paleontologists have identified a previously unknown species of dinosaur that lived in North America just before the mass extinction event around 66 million years ago. This catastrophic event wiped out the majority of plant and animal species on Earth, including all non-avian dinosaurs—marking the end of the Cretaceous period. It is thought to have resulted from the impact of a giant asteroid. A team of researchers described the new dinosaur species in a study published in the journal PLOS ONE. The creature likely stood roughly 3 feet tall at the hip and may have weighed between around 130 and 216 pounds—similar to a human—Kyle Atkins-Weltman, one of the authors of the study with Oklahoma State University, told Newsweek. The species forms part of a group known as the Oviraptorosaurs, which were very bird-like dinosaurs that lived during the Cretaceous (around 145 million to 66 million years ago) in North America and Asia. "[Oviraptorosaurs] had complex feathers, long legs, short tails, and later members had toothless beaks," Atkins-Weltman said.The new species, which has been named Eoneophron infernalis, lived at the very end of the Cretaceous, between 68-66.5 million years ago. This name roughly equates to the phrase "Pharaoh's dawn chicken from hell." The first word in the name, which refers to the dinosaur's genus (or group of species), is derived from the ancient Greek term eo (meaning "dawn") as well as the genus name of the Egyptian vulture, Neophron—sometimes referred to as the "pharaoh's chicken." The second word in the new species name derives from the Latin word for hell, a reference to where the fossils used to describe the new dinosaur were found. These fossils, representing a partial hindlimb, were initially uncovered in Meade County, South Dakota. The authors of the latest study subsequently obtained them from a private collector. This area forms part of the Hell Creek geological formation, which stretches over portions of Montana, North Dakota, South Dakota and Wyoming. "The Hell Creek formation is significant because it preserves the very last dinosaurs to ever roam western North America," Atkins-Weltman said. "There are not a great deal of dinosaur-bearing formations outside that region that also include the impact layer, so formations like the Hell Creek give us an opportunity to glimpse the very end of the age of dinosaurs." E. infernalis primarily differs from its larger, more completely-known cousin Anzu wyliei (similarly nicknamed the "chicken from hell,") primarily through characteristics in the ankle, which would not be visible in life. Anzu was first described in 2014, also based on fossils from the Hell Creek Formation.
"Like Anzu, [E. infernalis] would have had a short tail, long arms with feathered wings and grasping hands, and a toothless beak. It would have also had a bony crest on its head, again, similar to Anzu, though it may have differed in exact shape," Atkins-Weltman said. Both Anzu and the new species belong to a family within the Oviraptorosaur group known as the caenagnathids. These dinosaurs are not particularly well-known because their remains are scarce and often fragmentary—particularly from North America."I'd say, based on what we do have, these animals were opportunistic omnivores, with some species tending more towards carnivory—specifically eating small animals that they could swallow whole—while others may have been more herbivorous. Since these animals didn't have teeth, it's much harder to assess their diet," Atkins-Weltman said.The discovery of the new species is significant because some researchers argue that dinosaurs were decreasing in diversity towards the very end of the Cretaceous and that the asteroid impact was just the finishing blow in a gradual extinction.But the latest study found not only the new species but also evidence for a third, as yet unnamed caenagnathid species from Hell Creek—in addition to Anzu and E. infernalis—from this period. The evidence for this possible third species was found when the researchers reanalyzed some material in the collections of the Museum of the Rockies in Bozeman, Montana, that was previously deemed to represent Anzu. They found that this material did not match up with Anzu or the new species."In earlier fossil formations such as the Dinosaur Park [in Alberta, Canada], we find three caenagnathids as well—each of comparable size to one of the species we found. This indicates that this group of dinosaurs was not decreasing in diversity during that time period, and offers compelling evidence against the 'gradual extinction' model—at least for this group," Atkins-Weltman said.

Lake Mead Water Levels Update—'Little Chance' It Will Refill.
Lake Mead's water levels have risen slightly after a heavy amount of rainfall, but an expert has warned that there is little chance it will refill. The Colorado River reservoir, which lies between Nevada and Arizona, has seen a slight rise in water levels over the last week. This came following some heavy rains in the Western U.S. At the beginning of January, Lake Mead's water levels stood at 1,068 feet. Since then, it has steadily increased, and now, after the wet weather, stands at 1,072 feet as of Friday, January 26. But, Jennifer Pitt, National Audubon Society's Colorado River program director, told Newsweek that while every tiny bit of rainfall helps, the reservoir is still in trouble. "For more than 20 years, the amount of water stored in Lake Mead has declined as Colorado River water uses have exceeded supplies, and climate change is making this worse," Pitt said. "Today Lake Mead is 36 percent full—or 64 percent empty—with little chance it will refill absent changes in river management. "Daily, or even monthly fluctuations in Lake Mead are due to variations in the rate of water flowing in and water flowing out. "Local rainstorms can result in water flowing in but Mead is in the desert. Even significant local storms don't compare to the large volumes of water that flow in from the Colorado River." Despite the western U.S. having some heavy rainfall throughout 2023 and early this year, the lake's water levels are certainly not what they used to be. Officials fear that Lake Mead could drop to extremely low levels again in the coming year. In 2022, levels plummeted to around 1,040 feet. This was the lowest the lake has been since it was first constructed in the 1930s. The southwestern U.S. faces a water crisis largely due to it being plagued with drought for many years. The Colorado River's water levels are the lowest they have been in a century. This is largely due to climate change making seasonal weather patterns unpredictable. For example, a lack of precipitation means less snowpack running down the mountains and into the river. Lake Mead is not the only reservoir affected by these low water levels. Lake Powell, which borders Arizona and Utah, also relies on the same flows from the Colorado River, and has seen incredibly low water levels in recent years. "Water flowing into Mead is almost all from the Colorado River via the reservoir upstream—Lake Powell—which gets its almost all its water from snow in mountains in Colorado, Wyoming, Utah and New Mexico," Pitt said. "Lake Powell releases water to Lake Mead based on how much of that melted snow has flowed into the Colorado River and into Powell, but also based on requirements, including interstate water agreements, hydropower generation, and laws that protects natural and cultural resources in the Grand Canyon, which sits in between Powell and Mead. "Water flowing out of Mead, which also affects its elevation, is based on delivery to water users downstream." Around 25 million people rely on Lake Mead's water, meaning it is going to take a lot more than some rainfall to get it back to healthy levels. Pitt and other experts believe that the only way to solve the problem is serious water conservation. "Every drop helps, including a local rainstorm, but to stem decline of Lake Mead and stabilize water supplies for tens of millions of people in the long term, we need to figure out how to use less water across the region," Pitt said. "We need investments in watershed health and water conservation and efficiency that allow urban and rural communities that depend on Colorado River water to thrive even as climate change impacts shrink the river."

Plagues in Roman Italy Linked to Climate Change, Scientists Say.
A plague that ravaged through Roman Italy has been linked to extreme temperature drops in the region, scientists say. The Justinian Plague—the first recorded wave of bubonic plague to spread through Europe—is thought to have begun in the year 541 CE in Lower Egypt. Within months, it had spread across the Mediterranean in ships to the center of the empire in Constantinople, or modern-day Istanbul. From there, the plague raged on until 590 CE, killing as many as 10,000 people a day at its peak. By the time the plague had run its course, nearly half of the population of Constantinople had died, as well as about a third of the population of Europe. Now, this was not the first plague during the Roman period. Indeed, the Antonine Plague of 165 to 180 CE and the Plague of Cyprian from 251 to 266 CE also devastated the Roman population. And, according to new research from the universities of Bremen and Oklahoma, these plagues all had one thing in common: they were linked to a changing climate. During the Roman period, temperatures in Europe were different to how they are today. "We could reconstruct that the climate (at least the late summer autumn temperature in middle/south Italy) was relatively to today somewhat warmer," Karin Zonneveld, a professor of micropaleontology at the University of Bremen and the study's first author, told Newsweek. "We see in our record that a cooling trend started at about 100 CE but it was not before about 130 CE that the climate changed such that it moved out of the range that was occurring in the previous centuries. During the Roman period, temperatures in Europe were different to how they are today. "We could reconstruct that the climate (at least the late summer autumn temperature in middle/south Italy) was relatively to today somewhat warmer," Karin Zonneveld, a professor of micropaleontology at the University of Bremen and the study's first author, told Newsweek. "We see in our record that a cooling trend started at about 100 CE but it was not before about 130 CE that the climate changed such that it moved out of the range that was occurring in the previous centuries. "I was completely baffled by the good timely correlation between climatic change and major events in Roman history," Zonneveld said. "The expansion of the Roman empire at times of relatively stable conditions and periods of turmoil and crisis after climate started to vary strongly, as well as the times when Europe was suffering under major outbreaks of infectious diseases corresponding to phases of cold climate. "This was one of the moments that we as scientific team thought....wauw....can this be true?.... we have to verify this double, two double, three double check...... but yeh, it is clearly there in the data." While this correlation does not prove that the colder weather was causing disease outbreaks, it is well know that changes in climate can affect disease dynamics. "In short, climate affects the biology of the pathogen, ecosystems (including animal hosts and insect vectors), and human societies (causing migration, war, social crisis, and above all food shortages that make populations vulnerable to infection," co-author Kyle Harper, a professor of classics and letters at the University of Oklahoma, told Newsweek. "In general [these societies were] very poorly equipped [for these outbreaks.] Ancient societies lacked modern biomedicine, vaccines, antibiotics, public health, and so on." While modern medicine has advanced considerably since the time of the Romans, this data offers insights into how diseases might change in our own changing climate. "Within the scope of the current climate change it is of major importance to understand the links between climate and human health and we unfortunately do not understand these links as well as we would like," Zonneveld said. "Investigating the resilience of ancient societies to past climate change and relationships between past climate change and the occurrence of infectious disease might give us better insight into these relationships and the climate change induced challenges we are facing today. "As in Roman times, climate is still a major factor affecting basic aspects that are influencing our well being such as agriculture, accessibility to clean water, biodiversity, geographic distribution and migration of organisms etc." Harper added: "Our study underscores the need to study in more detail the mechanistic links between climate change and infectious disease dynamics."

Cancer-Cooling Protein Can Stop Disease Spreading.
A brand new treatment pathway might be able to help fight bowel cancer, scientists reveal. An immune system protein named Ku70 may be triggered to combat bowel cancer after being "switched on" by a cocktail of drugs, according to a new paper in the journal Science Advances. Bowel cancer, also known as colorectal cancer, is the third most common cancer in the United States (excluding skin cancers), with around 150,000 new cases being recorded annually. It is also the second most common cause of cancer-related death in the U.S. About 53,000 people are expected to die from the cancer in 2024, according to the American Cancer Society. Bowel cancer can be survivable if caught as early as possible. The new research by the Australian National University has found a possible new treatment for bowel cancer by utilizing Ku70. "We find that people with bowel cancer carry less amount of certain immune proteins in their body and are more likely to die from their disease earlier in life," Si Ming Man, a professor of immunology and infectious diseases at Australian National University, told Newsweek. "The immune protein called Ku70 is a good immune biomarker, meaning it helps us to predict who will fare better or worse after being diagnosed with bowel cancer. "We show that Ku70 is like a surveillance system that picks up damaged DNA in our cells. These damaged DNA can come from your own cells that are dying or dead or from microbes that live within our body. Ku70 'cools' off cancer cells, mops up damaged DNA, and instructs and maintains the cell in a dormant state, meaning it is no longer able to grow and divide. This is important because it helps [stop] healthy cells from turning into cancer cells or cancer cells continuing to become a tumor." They found that mutations in the gene that codes for Ku70 are associated with the development of colorectal cancer. Therefore, drugs targeting Ku70 and the complexes it forms with other proteins may help the molecule prevent bowel cancers from spreading. "Therapeutics targeting components of the Ku70 signalosome could improve the treatment outcomes in cancer," the authors wrote in the paper. Future bowel cancer screening could also include checking the levels of Ku70 in abnormal growths. "Our research shows that developing new drugs that can 'turn on' Ku70 can help fight bowel cancer. Checking the amount of Ku70 in pre-cancerous polyps could help guide the frequency of bowel cancer screens," Man said. "Sunday, February 4, is World Cancer Day. We hope our cancer research at the ANU helps raise awareness of cancer prevention, detection, and treatment on this important day."

Mental Health Boosted in Just Days by Eating Kiwifruit.
A powerful mood booster could be sitting in your fruit bowl. And adding this furry food into your diet could improve your vitality and mental well-being in as little as four days. When we think of vitamin C, we tend to think of oranges and citrus fruit. But another fruit contains almost twice as much vitamin C as an orange per serving: kiwifruit. In a recent study, published in the British Journal of Nutrition, researchers from New Zealand examined how eating kiwis can influence our mood. Within just four days of eating two kiwis a day, the participants began to see improvements in mood, self-esteem, optimism and purpose, peaking after two weeks. "It's great for people to know that small changes in their diet, like adding kiwifruit, could make a difference in how they feel every day," co-author Tamlin Conner, a professor in psychology at the University of Otago in New Zealand, said in a statement. The researchers believe that these changes in mood may in part be down to the fruit's high vitamin C content. Previous studies have shown that vitamin C intake is associated with improved mood, vitality, well-being and lower rates of depression, while vitamin C deficiency has been associated with higher rates of depression and cognitive impairment. The research team split the 155 participants in the study into three groups—those receiving a daily 250mg tablet supplement of vitamin C; those receiving two SunGold kiwifruits; and those given a one tablet placebo. At the end of the study, both those taking vitamin C and eating kiwis reported improvements in mood, but only those eating kiwis reported an improvement in self-perceived success. "This helps us see that what we eat can have a relatively fast impact on how we feel," Ben Fletcher, who conducted the research as part of his Ph.D. at Otago, said in a statement. "Our participants had relatively good mental health to begin with so had little room for improvement, but still reported the benefits of kiwifruit or vitamin C interventions." He added that, while participants taking vitamin C tablets did show some improvements, they saw the most significant effects after consuming whole kiwifruits, suggesting that there may be some other nutrients within the whole fruit that can also contribute to mental well-being. "We encourage a holistic approach to nutrition and well-being, incorporating various nutrient-rich foods into your diet," he said. 

Archaeologists Baffled by 1,900-Year-Old Weapons in Remote Cave.
Ancient hunting instruments dated to around 1,900 years ago have been discovered in a remote cave in Mexico—and archaeologists said they were puzzled by the location of the find. The hunting instruments were first spotted in a small gallery of the Cueva del Tesoro (Treasure Cave)—located in the central state of Querétaro—by members of a cavers association, the Mexican National Institute of Anthropology and History (INAH) said in a press release. The cavers subsequently notified INAH, and eventually, archaeologists with the institute were dispatched to investigate the cave. The archaeologists, under the supervision of the cavers, had to ascend more than 600 feet from the bottom of a ravine to reach the entrance of the cavity. They then had to pass through a narrow passageway until they reached the gallery. Within the gallery, the archaeologists identified an ancient atlatl (a spear- or dart-thrower) and two wooden darts, as well as some modified logs that were probably used for digging but may have been used as multifunctional tools. During their explorations, the INAH researchers did not find any other pre-Hispanic archaeological artifacts in the cave that would have enabled them to propose an explanation for how and why the hunting instruments ended up in the cave. However, an analysis of the samples will be announced on Saturday at a lecture series held in the Templo Mayor Museum, Mexico City. One of the archaeologists, Carlos Viramontes, said the hunting instruments provide evidence of hunter-gatherer societies, which were present in the region since around 7000 B.C., or 9,000 years ago. Among the traces that these hunter-gatherers left behind are hundreds of rock art sites. "Three decades ago, what we knew about these groups was based on sources from the 16th century, which depicted them as barbarians, and it was not until the end of the 1950s that the foundations were laid to delve deeper into the subject," Viramontes said in the press release. "In 1989, the INAH Querétaro Center recorded elements with similar dating in Mesa de León, a site near the Cueva del Tesoro, where we now recover the atlatl and the darts—pieces that add to this puzzle to understand hunter-gatherer societies, whose presence in the region dates back at least 9,000 years, and who survived two more centuries after the arrival of the Spanish." The dryness of the environment in the Treasure Cave allowed for the preservation of the hunting instruments, the age of which was determined using radiocarbon dating techniques. This gave a possible age range of A.D. 7-132. The INAH archaeologists said the mystery of the latest discoveries will persist until new investigations are carried out in the areas surrounding the cave. This may enable experts to determine how and why these instruments were left there.
Body Found in Bog Turns Out to Be 2,000-Year-Old Cold Case.
Human remains found in a bog turned out to be the body of an ancient person who may have lived more than 2,000 years ago, police announced. The Archaeological Unit within the Police Service of Northern Ireland's Body Recovery Team discovered the body after being alerted to the presence of bones on the surface of peatland in the vicinity of Bellaghy—a village in County Londonderry. On initial examination, police could not be sure if the remains were ancient or the result of a more recent death. "Therefore, we proceeded to excavate the body with full forensic considerations in a sensitive and professional manner," detective inspector Nikki Deehan said in a press release. "This approach also ensures that any DNA evidence could be secured for any potential criminal investigation. Ultimately this wasn't the case in this instance." Excavations initially uncovered numerous bones, including those relating to a lower left leg and right arm. Further investigations revealed more bones belonging to the same person. The bones of a lower left arm and a left femur were found protruding from the ground a few feet south of the surface remains, for example. Archaeologists also uncovered additional finger bones and the breastbone, among other remains A post-mortem carried out by a forensic anthropologist revealed that the person was possibly a male age 13 to 17 at the time of death. Little is known about how the person died, but unlike some other ancient remains found in bogs, the skeleton was well-preserved, even featuring the presence of partial skin, fingernails, toenails and possibly a kidney. "The well-preserved nature of the body meant radiocarbon dating could be used to ascertain the time of death," Deehan said. Radiocarbon dating revealed that the person could have died about 2,000 to 2,500 years ago. This is the first time radiocarbon dating has been used on a bog body in Northern Ireland, according to the police press release. "It's now our only intact Northern Irish Iron Age bog body," Alastair Ruffell of Queen's University, Belfast, told the Belfast Telegraph. "There have been others, but they have been lost in the mists of time. It's a truly unique archaeological discovery." The ancient bog body was discovered on land owned by Northern Ireland's Department of Agriculture, Environment and Rural Affairs (DAERA). "We are now working with National Museums NI to transfer it to them so that they can continue with further examination and preservation of the remains," John Joe O'Boyle, chief executive of the Forest Service—which is part of DAERA—said in a press release. "I hope, in due course, the find will help us all understand better something of our very early history. Seamus Heaney, when he was writing his series of poems inspired by bog bodies, probably never expected such a find on his own doorstep. It certainly adds an important chapter to the historical and cultural significance of this hinterland and archaeological discoveries of bog bodies across Europe."

The Moon Is Shrinking—and It Could Affect Future NASA Missions.
Our lunar companion has slowly been shrinking, causing its surface to shrivel up like a prune and become more prone to dangerous moonquakes. The moon has shrunk by around 150 feet in circumference over the past few million years as it's cooled. As a result, its surface has wrinkled and buckled like the skin of a dried fruit. Because of the brittleness of its surface, the moon has formed faults where its surface has warped, which may endanger future missions there. These faults have been discovered in the moon's south polar region and have now been linked to a very powerful magnitude 5 moonquake recorded by Apollo seismometers in the 1970s, a new paper in The Planetary Science Journal reveals. Moonquakes are caused by mechanisms similar to earthquakes as a result of faults in the crust slipping past each other. Moonquakes can last for much longer than earthquakes, often persisting for several hours, as seen in the powerful quake detected in the 1970s by the Apollo equipment. If a quake of this kind hit a lunar settlement, it could cause damage to structures and equipment and may trigger landslides that could be catastrophic. Using models, the researchers discovered that this region is particularly in danger of moonquakes and resultant landslides. This may pose a major problem for future moon missions, as some of the most at-risk areas for these landslides include some proposed by NASA for crewed Artemis III landings because of the presence of water ice nearby. "Our modeling suggests that shallow moonquakes capable of producing strong ground shaking in the south polar region are possible from slip events on existing faults or the formation of new thrust faults," Tom Watters, a geologist at the Smithsonian Institution, said in a statement. He continued: "The global distribution of young thrust faults, their potential to be active, and the potential to form new thrust faults from ongoing global contraction should be considered when planning the location and stability of permanent outposts on the Moon." "You can think of the moon's surface as being dry, grounded gravel and dust. Over billions of years, the surface has been hit by asteroids and comets, with the resulting angular fragments constantly getting ejected from the impacts," Nicholas Schmerr, a co-author of the paper and an associate professor of geology at the University of Maryland, said in a statement. "As a result, the reworked surface material can be micron-sized to boulder-sized but all very loosely consolidated. Loose sediments make it very possible for shaking and landslides to occur," he said. The researchers hope to further explore how the moon's faults may affect its seismicity and how these might affect future lunar missions. "As we get closer to the crewed Artemis mission's launch date, it's important to keep our astronauts, our equipment and infrastructure as safe as possible," Schmerr said. "This work is helping us prepare for what awaits us on the moon—whether that's engineering structures that can better withstand lunar seismic activity or protecting people from really dangerous zones," he said. 
Seattle's Salmon Death Problem May Have Been Solved.
Huge numbers of salmon in the streams of Washington state's Puget Sound die every year due to tire pollution, but researchers may have found a way to prevent the massacre. By making pavements permeable, scientists hope to protect the coho salmon from tire wear particle pollution entering the streams via stormwater runoff. Four different types of permeable pavement have been shown to act as filters to tire pollution, preventing up to 96 percent of the tire particles from escaping, according to a new paper in the journal Science of the Total Environment. The use of these permeable pavements resulted in a 68 percent drop in the presence of 6PPD-quinone, a tire-associated chemical known to kill coho salmon in urban streams. Coho salmon, also known as silver salmon, are native to the northwest of North America, and are anadromous, meaning that they hatch and grow up in freshwater streams before heading out to sea for much of the rest of their lives. Around 0.1 percent of the fish then return to the streams when it's time to breed, laying their eggs and dying. A paper published in the journal Science in 2020showed many salmon that returned to the streams, especially after a period of heavy rainfall, died before they could spawn, and this may be due to the presence of tire pollutants in the water. In many years, over half all the salmon died before spawning. Large rains wash tiny pieces of aging tires from roads into streams, including the chemical 6PPD, which transforms into 6PPD-quinone when exposed to ozone or sunlight. 6PPD-quinone is very toxic to salmon. "Animals are exposed to this giant chemical soup and we don't know what many of the chemicals in it even are," Edward Kolodziej, an associate professor with UW Tacoma's Division of Sciences & Mathematics and UW Department of Civil & Environmental Engineering, and co-author of the 2020 paper, said in a statement at the time. "Here we started with a mix of 2,000 chemicals and were able to get all the way down to this one highly toxic chemical, something that kills large fish quickly and we think is probably found on every single busy road in the world." Now, researchers have developed four permeable pavements made of either asphalt or concrete that may help to prevent 6PPD-quinone from entering the streams. "The pressure on existing stormwater management technologies is becoming problematic, especially with climate change and increased development," study lead author Chelsea Mitchell, an environmental and natural resources researcher at Washington State University, said in a statement. "Permeable pavements are a very promising type of green stormwater infrastructure because they could treat this type of pollution where it's generated, rather than downstream." These permeable pavements are more porous, allowing chemicals shed from tires to be captured by the roads rather than washed into waterways. The researchers tested the permeable pavements by applying ground-up tire tread across them, then simulating a heavy rainstorm, and measuring where the chemicals ended up. They found that 96 percent of the tire particles were retained by the roads, and there was a subsequent 68 percent drop in the presence of 6PPD-quinone in the runoff. "Permeable pavements make a difference in managing 6PPD-quinone and its source — tire wear particles," study co-author Ani Jayakaran, a professor at Washington State University's Puyallup Research and Extension Center, said in the statement. "6PPD-quinone is hydrophobic, and we think the chemical is being absorbed into the internal surfaces of the pavement system." While this will help prevent massive die-off of the coho salmon, the permeable pavements could also benefit human health. "Tire particles are so fine they can become airborne and possibly enter the human body through even a gentle breeze. And even in small doses, 6PPD-quinone is toxic to salmon," Jayakaran said. "Both could impact human health, especially in communities who live near busy roads." The researchers hope to test the permeable pavements much more extensively, and also note that using this new material in practice would be challenging, due to the cost and effort of replacing roads. The permeable pavement material, due to the level of porosity, is also more prone to crumbling than traditional road surfaces. "We're not suggesting that permeable pavements are an appropriate replacement for all roadways," Jayakaran said. "There's still a lot of work to be done to increase their strength and utility, and this is certainly not a silver bullet. However, our research holds great promise, and we're pointing in a very hopeful direction for future management of 6PPD-quinone and tire wear particles."
Students Who Still Take Notes by Hand Better Off, Say Neuroscientists.
Scientists may have found a way to improve the way you study. Hint: you may want to take a step away from the computer. Typing notes on a computer is now more popular than handwriting in schools and universities. There are several benefits to keyboard typing including being faster and more efficient. However, Norwegian researchers have now found that handwriting is actually better for brain connectivity, meaning it could actually improve memory while studying. Their findings are published in Frontiers in Psychology. Audrey van der Meer, a brain researcher at the Norwegian University of Science and Technology and co-author of the study told Newsweek that they were surprised to find that "differences in brain activity during handwriting and typewriting were so clear and prominent." "We know that writing by hand is excellent brain stimulation for people of all ages. The careful forming of the required letters by hand is a fine sensorimotor skill that activates most of the brain," van der Meer told Newsweek. "When we write by hand, important neural networks are formed that promote learning and remembering. Many people believe that we have a brain to think or feel and are surprised to learn that the brain evolved mainly to control movement. Such widespread brain connectivity is known to be crucial for memory formation and for encoding new information and, therefore, is beneficial for learning." The findings were reached when researchers analyzed EEG data from 36 university students. These students were asked to write or type a word. EEGs measured the electrical activity using sensors that were placed on the head. This allowed researchers to measure brain connectivity when the students were either handwriting or typing. They discovered that brain connectivity increased when the students were handwriting. Brain connectivity did not seem to increase when they typed. Van der Meer said that this suggests, that precisely controlled hand movements when using a pen "contribute extensively to the brain's connectivity patterns that promote learning. "For this reason, students may want to consider handwriting notes rather than typing them, as according to these findings, it will probably serve them in good stead when exam time comes around the corner. "The more we remove fine and gross motor skills from our daily lives, the less we use our brain for what it is good at. The brain is like a muscle, and without appropriate and regular challenges, neural networks will not be established or may even disappear, and the brain will effectively shrivel," van der Meer said. "Therefore, based on our findings we recommend that all young children receive a minimum of handwriting tuition in primary schools around the globe. Not only because it is so good for the developing brain, but also because handwriting is part of our cultural heritage. I think we all agree that it would be good if the next generation can write a handwritten love letter, or just a grocery list." During the experiment, the students used a digital pen to form the letters. However, this did not affect the findings. The researchers believe it is the physical forming of letters that improves attention and recall in the brain, rather than the computer screen. This, compared to simply pressing a key on a keyboard quickly, forces the brain to engage more in the task at hand. Van Meer pointed to the fact that many children, who have learned to read and right on a table, often have difficulty telling certain letters apart, such as d and b, which are the same shape only reversed. Following these findings, the researchers are urging the need to give students more of an opportunity to write with hands rather than on a keyboard. They suggest even putting guidelines in place, whereby students must have a minimum amount of handwriting while learning. "We plan to test the effect of handwritten vs typewritten notes on learning more directly in the classroom. We would also like to test the elderly to see if keeping up handwriting practice at an older age will keep the brain in shape and fend off cognitive decline," van der Meer said.

How Alligators 'Frozen Solid' Under Swamp Ice in North Carolina Breathe.
Arecent video showing how alligators breathe underwater in freezing winter temperatures has quickly gone viral, leaving viewers both shocked and amazed. TikTok user @2guysandsomeland, an employee of the Shallotte River Swamp Park in North Carolina, filmed his "swamp puppies" in a January 21 TikTok video. These alligators were submerged under the "frozen solid" ice swamp and yet, they were still breathing. The employee went on to explain the phenomenon of how these alligators are still able to breathe, which is known as brumation. It's like a reptile's version of hibernation, or as the employee said in the video: "They're taking a break from being sassy and just conserving energy." During brumation, alligators will shut down and go dormant to conserve energy. However, they tilt their heads up ever so slightly out of the frozen water so they are still able to breathe. They are even able to hold their breath for up to 24 hours during brumation. The gators look like icicles frozen in time and for once, they do not look intimidating. That is probably why this employee took a once-in-a-lifetime chance to touch the "danger snorkels" of the swamp puppies since they would not be able to react. But he did warn users to not try it at home. The alligators can break through the ice after all, he mentioned in a follow-up video. Between the way alligators survive in the winter and the fact that this employee made these creatures truly look like swamp puppies, it's no wonder the clip quickly racked in over 15 million views and 1.8 million likes. Viewers have been speechless. One user said: "I was today years old when I found out that alligators brumate." "Dude, if I had the opportunity to ethically boop a swamp puppy like that, I would," added another. Newsweek reached out to @2guysandsomeland via TikTok for additional information. Alligators in the United States are going through brumation as winter temperatures continue to freeze water sources across the country. Last week, Newsweek reported alligators at a Texas adventure park and sanctuary were also frozen beneath the ice. A staff member shared in that video that the alligator's heart was beating three beats per minute. Alligators shut down their movement and metabolism to survive the winter season, a process that could last between four and five months.
'Starve a Fever' Adage Is Bad Advice, Virologist Warns.
As winter rages on, the cold and flu season is in full swing. And with a runny nose and a pounding head, even the most skeptical among us may be tempted to turn to old wives' tales and folk remedies. However, not only are these often ineffective, but scientists have warned that some can be harmful to our health. Take the old adage "feed a cold, starve a fever." Yes, we should feed our bodies when we have a cold, but energy and nutrients are just as important when we have a fever.A fever, like excess mucus, is just one of our body's many defense mechanisms to get rid of bacteria and viruses. "Many [disease-causing organisms], viruses in particular, don't like high temperatures," Dr. Pedro Piedra, a professor of molecular virology, microbiology and pediatrics at the Baylor College of Medicine, told Newsweek. "The fever affects their ability to replicate." But how do our bodies react to this rise in temperature? "When you have a fever, there's this increased metabolic [energy] demand," Piedra said. In other words, we need more energy, not less. In fact, studies have shown that raising your temperature by just 1 degree Celsius increases your body's calorie consumption by 10 percent. And that's not all. "In addition, one of the ways that your body tries to cool itself down is you actually start breathing a little faster," Piedra said. "So you need more energy, and you're also losing more water. We can more easily get dehydrated because we lose water by evaporation as we breathe." When your throat is burning, drinking more water is quite easy to remember. But eating enough can be difficult when you are bed-bound because of nausea and malaise. "[In this case], I would suggest eating more bland types of foot," Piedra said. "A nice chicken or lamb soup gives you both the calories and dehydration, so soups are excellent [when you're sick]."As well as fighting off the infection, fevers can also be a danger signal. "Too much fever can be very problematic, particularly for children, so you want to keep your fever down," Piedra said. "When you're feeling unwell and you have a high fever, remember to reach out to your physician or nurse and ask for advice so that, if there's something serious, they can either see you early or give you guidance."

Chemicals in Baby Products Linked to Premature Birth.
A chemical found in baby products may be associated with premature birth, a new study by researchers at UC Davis has found. Exposure during pregnancy to several organophosphate ester flame retardants, also known as OPEs, has been linked to birth before full term, with other OPEs being linked to higher birth weight, according to a new study in the journal Environmental Health Perspectives. OPEs are found in a vast number of things, including furniture, baby products, electronics, textiles and building materials. They are flame retardants used to prevent fires, and also to make plastic products. These chemicals were used increasingly from the mid-2000s as polybrominated flame retardants were phased out due to toxicity concerns, with OPEs taking their place. However, OPEs degrade over time and become particulate, being found in dust, and therefore entering the body via skin or inhalation. OPEs are often found in urine from people across the U.S., leading the researchers at UC Davis to investigate if they have any effect on pregnant women and their babies. "This is the largest study evaluating OPEs, and provides evidence of a link between exposure and preterm birth. The widespread use of products with new flame retardants among pregnant people in the U.S. means that a significant number of births could be affected by these compounds," Deborah Bennett, senior author of the study and a professor of environmental health at UC Davis, told Newsweek. "In fact, ECHO researchers learned that more than 85 percent of the study participants had three specific markers of OPE exposure in their bodies." The researchers analyzed data from 6,646 mother-child pairs from across the U.S. in the Environmental Influences on Child Health Outcome (ECHO) study. They measured nine OPE biomarkers in the urine of pregnant people between 2007 and 2020, with most of the samples being taken during the second and third trimester of the pregnancy. They also used the data on the birth outcomes of the child, including birth weight and gestational age, i.e. how premature the baby was. They found that of the nine OPE markers, the presence of three of them in the urine was associated with an increased risk of premature birth, defined as being born before 37 weeks. These OPEs included the chemicals dibutyl phosphate, di-isobutyl phosphate, and bis(butoxyethyl) phosphate. This association was especially pronounced for female infants. Being born before full term can lead to several issues, with premature babies being more likely to have long-term health issues such as asthma and feeding problems, as well as delays in development. They are also at greater risk of sudden infant death syndrome. "Preterm birth is a risk factors for neonatal mortality and chronic morbidity, increasing risks of neurodevelopmental delays and respiratory and gastrointestinal complications," Bennett said. "Other potential health outcomes from these compounds include impacts on neurodevelopment and early growth trajectories." Some other OPEs were found to be associated with higher birth weights, which included bis(1-chloro-2-propyl) phosphate, bis(2-methylphenyl) phosphate, and dipropyl phosphate. High birth weight may increase the risk of childhood obesity. "There were over 6,000 pregnancies included in this study, and with such a large study, we are very confident of our findings," Bennett said in a statement. "Policy options to reduce exposure to organophosphate ester flame retardants should be considered." The researchers also noted that the effects of OPEs may arise due to them being endocrine (hormone) disruptors and causing inflammation and oxidative stress, which may lead to premature births. They hope to further investigate the effects of OPEs on the human body. "We plan to look at other childhood outcomes for these ECHO children, including neurodevelopment and growth trajectories," Bennett said.

Deadly Foodborne Bacteria Found To Hide From Sanitizers.
Our efforts to protect ourselves form potentially deadly bacteria may be in vain, scientists have warned. Listeria is the third leading cause of death from foodborne diseases in the U.S., the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Reports. Roughly 1,600 people contract serious Listeria infections every year, resulting in 260 deaths. While the illness is usually mild, Listeria bacteria can spread beyond the intestines, potentially infecting other parts of the body. To avoid Listeria contamination, food suppliers often spray their produce with sanitizers to kill any bacteria. But, according to a new study from Penn State University, Listeria bacteria may be able to evade these sanitation protocols. The study, published in the journal Biofilm, demonstrates how other harmless species of bacteria in the fruit-packing environment can stick together and form a protective shield, called a biofilm, around the Listeria bacteria. "We found two groups of microorganisms in the tree fruit packing environments, Pseudomonadaceae and Xanthomonadaceae, that are very good at forming biofilms and protecting Listeria monocytogenes," co-author Jasna Kovac, a Professor of Food Safety at Penn State, said in a statement. "Biofilms represent a physical barrier that reduces the effective diffusion and antimicrobial action of sanitizers and is hypothesized to increase Listeria monocytogenes' tolerance to sanitizers used in food processing facilities." In other words, the protected bacteria are faced with a much lower dose of sanitizer, which they can more easily tolerate. The results highlight the need to assess how effective commonly used sanitizers are against the harmless biofilm-forming bacteria that can often be found in food processing environments. "The findings of this research project will inform and enhance sanitation protocols and extension training efforts targeted at the tree-fruit industry to effectively control Listeria monocytogenes," co-author Luke LaBorde, a professor in food science and an expert in the tracking of Listeria monocytogenes in produce production and processing environments, said in a statement. If you are immunocompromised, pregnant or over the age of 65, the CDC recommends avoiding foods that are more likely to contain Listeria. 

Mystery of Mars' 'Burps' Could Aid Search for Life.
Scientists may have solved a long-standing Martian mystery, supporting our never-ending quest to find signs of life on the red planet—Why does Mars burp? In recent years, NASA's Curiosity rover has detected varying levels of methane gas in Mars' atmosphere. While this might sound unremarkable, this fluctuating belch and fart gas has excited scientists because—if its presence on Earth is anything to go by—it could be evidence of microbial life on the red planet. Curiosity is the largest and most capable rover ever sent to Mars, and it has been collecting data since 2012. As part of NASA's Mars Science Laboratory Mission, the rover was sent to answer a simple question: "Did Mars ever have the right environmental conditions to support small life forms?" Therefore, the planet's methane emissions offer an exciting opportunity to explore this question. But in order to do so, we need to be able to sample them. And that is a lot easier said than done. "Understanding Mars's methane variations has been highlighted by NASA's Curiosity team as the next key step towards figuring out where it comes from," John Ortiz, a graduate student at Los Alamos National Laboratory, said in a statement. "There are several challenges associated with meeting that goal, and a big one is knowing what time of a given sol (Martian day) is best for Curiosity to perform an atmospheric sampling experiment." To better predict these fluctuations, Ortiz and colleagues from across the U.S. used mathematical models to simulate these elusive emissions. The team argues that the gas most likely originates underground, therefore it simulated the path the gas must take through the planet's fractured rock to the surface. They also consider how changes in temperature can affect how much of the methane will stick to pores in the surface rock. And, from these models, they were able to calculate the best time of day to collect methane samples. "Our work suggests several key time windows for Curiosity to collect data," Ortiz said. "We think these offer the best chance of constraining the timing of methane fluctuations, and (hopefully) down the line bringing us closer to understanding where it comes from on Mars." In a study published in the journal JGR Planets, the team concluded that the best time to collect this data is prior to sunrise during the upcoming northern summer period, which lies within the candidate time from the Curiosity rover's next sampling campaign.

People Who Don't Understand Pregnancy More Likely to Oppose Abortion.
People who know more about pregnancy and what it involves are more likely to support abortion rights, research has found. Regardless of political position, the more details people understand about what pregnancy involves, the less they support making abortion illegal, finds a new study presented at the Southern Political Science Association Conference in New Orleans. It comes nearly two years after Roe v. Wade was overturned by the Supreme Court in June 2022, removing Constitutional protection for abortion access. In the time since, several states have banned abortion with no exceptions for rape or incest, including Texas, Oklahoma, Arkansas, Louisiana, Alabama, Kentucky, Missouri, South Dakota and Tennessee. In other states, like Idaho, Indiana, Mississippi, North Dakota and West Virginia, abortion is banned with limited exceptions, like rape or incest, but this comes with a time limit and often a requirement that the incident must have been reported to law enforcement. Some states have banned abortion after a certain number of weeks of pregnancy: in Georgia and South Carolina, it's banned after 6 weeks, while the limit is 12 weeks in Nebraska and North Carolina, 15 weeks in Arizona and Florida, and 18 weeks in Utah. In many of the states where abortion is legal, it is allowed up to the point where a fetus is viable outside of the womb, which occurs at roughly 24 weeks. The study polled over 1,300 adults in the United States from across the political spectrum and found that those who knew more about pregnancy and how a fetus grows were more likely to support keeping abortion legal. "Our study finds that the more people understand about pregnancy, the more they support legal abortion. We also find, that people seem just as opposed to 12-week abortion bans—a presumed compromise position—as they are to restrictive 6-week bans," study author Steven Greene, professor of political science at North Carolina State University, told Newsweek. People who knew what a trimester was and who knew that a pregnancy is counted back to a woman's last period, rather than to conception are more likely to oppose laws banning abortions. "As knowing more about pregnancy also is associated with being female and more educated, we thought it was important to make sure this relationship would hold up with appropriate statistical controls," Greene said. "And, yes, we did find that even when controlling for demographic factors and political and religious beliefs, this association between pregnancy knowledge and abortion attitudes persisted." The fertilization of an egg occurs in the third week of a pregnancy: the first two weeks of a pregnancy are the time between the woman's last period and conception. The study also found that laws limiting abortion to before 12 weeks only were not more supported than laws that limited it to before 6 weeks. "This suggests that efforts by some politicians to promote 12-week bans as a moderate, or compromise, position are likely not effective," Greene said in a statement. After week 6, the fetus is around the size of a lentil, at 8 weeks, the size of a kidney bean, and at 12 weeks, the size of a lime. "There is a tremendous amount of research on public attitudes toward abortion in the United States, but very little of that work has been done since the Dobbs v. Jackson decision in 2022 that overturned Roe v. Wade," Greene said. "We wanted to ask questions that directly address the policy issues raised in state legislatures in the wake of Dobbs. "Will people support a politician who promotes six-week bans? Will people support a politician who promotes 12-week bans? Do people who understand that these weeks are counted starting from a woman's most recent period view abortion laws differently from people who think that these weeks are counted from when a woman actually got pregnant?" he said. The researchers hope that these findings will highlight the importance of educating the public about pregnancy and sex when garnering support for abortion rights. "One possible take-away here is that efforts to educate the public on basic sex education may be a viable strategy for groups trying to build support for women's access to abortion," Greene said.

Deaths From Snakebites Could Be Slashed by Seven Simple Steps.
Snakebite deaths could be slashed by a few simple steps, researchers have revealed in a new study. Around the world, 140,000 people die from venomous snakebites every year. Another 400,000 survive, but are left with a disability, according to the World Health Organization (WHO). Yet, the issue is often overlooked despite its severity. For this reason, scientists are looking to tackle the issue. And now a team of international scientists from the University of Exeter in England may have come up with the steps needed to do so. Their findings were published in Conservation Science and Practice.
 To reach their findings, they asked 535 residents of Tamil Nadu in India to fill out a survey. The area is known for its high frequency of snakebites. Although only 5 percent of India's population live in the state, it is where around 20 percent of snakebite deaths occur.
India is home to a variety of extremely venomous snakes. The species that pose the most risk are common kraits, the Indian cobra, Russell's viper and the saw-scaled viper. These snakes are responsible for around 90 percent of snakebites in India, according to the WHO. A bite from any of these species is a medical emergency. Some of their bites can cause death in minutes if they are not treated immediately. "Not to single out any individual nation, but India is thought to have around 58,000 deaths a year and many more survivors left permanently physically disabled. This is a fair amount of lives lost relative to other national health issues; especially considering snakebites take place every year and have done for some time," Harrison Carter, who led the study as part of a masters in conservation and biodiversity at the University of Exeter, told Newsweek. "I suppose it comes down to a country's relative prioritization of issues. However, we shouldn't accept this rationale for a key reason—snake killings in retaliation. Humans are generally very fearful of snakes across the tropics, and snakes killed each year are thought to be in the hundreds of thousands across tropical regions." The survey asked what current protective measures residents already take, and what prevents them from doing more. From the answers, scientists identified seven steps that could be implemented to prevent some of the major problem areas that lead to snakebites. These steps included an increase in snake education for communities who live in danger areas. The study noted that more awareness of how snakes contribute to the ecosystem, as well as being able to tell the difference between venomous and non-venomous species, may reduce fear, thus leading to fewer conflicts with snakes. "Snakes offer important ecosystem services to rural communities in these areas, pest control for example, which indirectly manages the spread of disease and supports crop yields," Carter said. "I believe the extent of this snake fear drives the killing of snakes, where if fewer bites occurred through effective prevention, tolerance to snakes would improve. This isn't just a human health issue, it's a human-wildlife coexistence issue—disaster even—and cannot afford to be overlooked any longer." They also recommended initiating trial periods when implementing new preventive measures in communities. The researchers said this could improve confidence among residents, which could lead to the measures being adopted more widely. Other suggestions in their list were more technical, such as assessing "context-specific barriers," the "costs and benefits of unrecognized snakebite prevention measures, enhance the awareness of snakebite prevention, expanding the research on venomous snakes, and researching the "cues to action in the adoption of snakebite prevention measures." From the study results, researchers found that more than half of people exclusively used government-recommended guidelines in snakebite prevention, such as keeping homes tidy and using a light when it is dark outside. However, 41 percent of people used their own preventive measures that are not supported by evidence. This included using salt, garlic, turmeric or bleach as snake deterrents. "Some of these recommendations could be actioned immediately, and others will take more time," Carter said. "Perhaps our key finding is snakebite prevention measures have to work for the people if they are to be adopted, it's not enough for them to apply a theoretical fix. For example, in the study area, most people work in paddy fields, where protective boots just fill up with water and are not practical for use." In nearly every community that researchers visited, people knew someone who had either died of been seriously injured by a snake recently, Carter said in a summary of the findings. "I think there are two clear next steps. Initially, our research methods should be applied elsewhere in India and across the tropics, reiterating technical details where valuable—to understand the broader scope of factors that affect the adoption of snakebite prevention," Carter said. "The other next step would be to build on knowledge gained in our study area, and support the government to empower closer organizations to work with communities to identify evidence-based solutions to prevent snakebites that work for the people at risk. "It would be particularly exciting to align prevention activity with particularly high bite-risk months, but greater ecological research is required to understand the temporal/spatial behavior of medically significant snake species for this to be reliably effective."
Student Discovers Ancient Flying Reptile That Lived 200 Million Years Ago.
Acollege student has discovered a prehistoric flying reptile that lived around 200 million years ago in what is now the United Kingdom. Mike Cawthorne, a masters student at the University of Bristol in southwest England, identified the gliding, winged creature while studying numerous reptile fossils from limestone quarries in the region. The region around where the city of Bristol lies today would have looked very different around 200 million years ago at the boundary of the Late Triassic and Early Jurassic periods. At the time, the area was home to an archipelago of small islands set in a warm, sub-tropical sea. What was the largest of these now-vanished islands is referred to as the Mendip palaeo-Island. The limestone quarries where the flying reptiles came from—known as Emborough, Highcroft and Combe—once formed part of Mendip. The quarry sites are rich in fossils, but their collections have not been described in detail before. For a study published in the journal Proceedings of the Geologists' Association, Cawthorne investigated fossils from these sites that were collected in the mid-20th century. "The collections I studied had been made in the 1940s and 1950s when the quarries were still active, and paleontologists were able to visit and see fresh rock faces and speak to the quarrymen," Cawthorne said in a press release. The study of the fossils revealed evidence of an array of unusual animals, shedding new light on these prehistoric ecosystems. "I had hoped to find some dinosaur bones, or even their isolated teeth, but in fact I found everything else but dinosaurs," Cawthorne said. Among the animals that the researchers identified were ancient crocodile ancestors, the lizard-like reptile variodens and the aquatic reptile pachystropheus that may have lived similarly to modern-day otters—likely eating shrimp and small fish. In addition, Cawthorne identified prehistoric flying reptiles from a group known as the kuehneosaurs. These ancient creatures were small animals that looked like lizards with wings made from a layer of skin stretching over their elongated side ribs. These wings would have enabled the creatures to swoop from tree to tree. Like the modern flying lizard draco, kuehneosaurs most likely wandered about on the ground and sometimes climbed trees in search of insect prey. If they were startled or spotted an insect flying by, they could launch themselves into the air and land safely several feet away. "It took a lot of work identifying the fossil bones, most of which were separate and not in a skeleton," Mike Benton, an author on the study from Bristol's School of Earth Sciences, said in the press release. "However, we have a lot of comparative material, and Mike Cawthorne was able to compare the isolated jaws and other bones with more complete specimens from the other sites around Bristol. "He has shown that the Mendip Palaeo-island[...]was home to diverse small reptiles feeding on the plants and insects. He didn't find any dinosaur bones, but it's likely that they were there because we have found dinosaur bones in other locations of the same geological age around Bristol."

Eastern US Getting More Extreme Winter Weather From Atmospheric Rivers.
Chaotic winter weather is becoming the norm as natural phenomena known as atmospheric rivers get more and more common in the U.S., research has found. Over the past 40 years, these long, narrow atmospheric systems have increased in frequency over the eastern U.S., mainly due to changes in the jet stream, the study in the journal Science Advances reveals. Atmospheric rivers carry large volumes of water vapor, which can be released as huge amounts of rain or snow as the system passes over land. According to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), the average one carries the same amount of water as the average flow at the mouth of the Mississippi River, but the most powerful can contain 15 times that. "Using multiple observational datasets, we find that there is a significant increase in AR [atmospheric river] frequency over the EUS [eastern U.S.] during the past four decades. This trend is mainly driven by changes in large-scale circulations, particularly the poleward shift and strengthening of the mid-latitude jet stream over North America," the researchers wrote in the paper. Atmospheric rivers usually form in the tropics, moving north towards the U.S. mainland, where they can result in severe flash flooding and landslides, which can lead to damage to infrastructure and danger to life. The Pineapple Express is a common nickname for a type of strong atmospheric river that forms near Hawaii, bringing moisture over to the U.S. West Coast. "While they act as the drought buster along the US West Coast: 33 to 74 percent of the persistent droughts from 1950 to 2010 were ended by the arrival of landfalling AR storms, they are also the primary drivers of flood damages there: ARs generated most of the observed high daily runoff in the western US (WUS) during water years 1949–2015," the authors wrote. In the early months of 2023, several successive Pineapple Express brought huge amounts of snowfall to the west, resulting in record-breaking snowpacks in the Rocky Mountains and the Sierra Nevadas. When spring came, this then led to widespread chaos as the snow melted into water, leading to flash floods. In the eastern states, atmospheric rivers form over the Gulf of Mexico, pulling moisture northwards. They are more common there than in the west, but are usually less powerful and lead to less rainfall."Approximately 30 to 35 percent of annual precipitation over a broad area of EUS can be attributed to AR activity, and ARs are responsible for over 60 percent extreme precipitation events and more than 70 percent flood events across the EUS," wrote the authors. Now, however, atmospheric rivers over the eastern states are becoming more frequent, due to changes in the Pacific/North America (PNA) climate pattern that have caused the jet stream to move further north. "The PNA pattern has been found to play a critical role in this transition. As the PNA pattern shifts toward a more negative phase, it favors the northward transport of warm and moist air from the Gulf of Mexico and the Atlantic, associated with more [atmospheric rivers] affecting the [eastern U.S.]," the authors wrote in the paper. "Our study revealed that the PNA pattern has a stronger influence on AR variability over the EUS than other climate modes." With increased numbers of atmospheric rivers being flung across the eastern U.S, this could lead to increased frequencies of winter storms, and resultant damage. "There are numerous hazards as we can see from recent events, snow, ice, strong winds, coastal erosion and high water levels when impacting the coastline, thunderstorms, heavy rainfall, tornadoes and hail," Esther Mullens, an assistant professor of geography at the University of Florida, told Newsweek. The authors state in the paper that this finding is important in predicting how precipitation and flooding will change in the coming years. "With the promising prediction skill of the PNA index at lead time of one to two months during winter, it may provide some potential for subseasonal to seasonal forecasting of AR activity over the EUS, which could empower decision-makers to proactively prepare for potential AR-associated impacts, developing effective strategies to manage water resources and mitigate the effects of extreme weather events."

Western US Seeing Extreme Weather 'Unprecedented' in 500 Years.
Droughts in the Western U.S. have risen to an "unprecedented" level since the 16th century, a new study has revealed. "Hot drought" refers to concurrent drought conditions that are stretching across the country, largely because of climate change. The study from multi-institutional researchers, published in the journal Science, found that these severe conditions have been increasing in not just severity but how often they have occurred over the past 100 years. To get these findings, lead author Karen King and colleagues combined summer temperatures in the U.S. from 1553 to 2020 by analyzing tree rings, which show temperature changes through soil moisture. They discovered that the past 20 years in the Western U.S. have been the hottest in over five centuries. "If anthropogenic warming continues according to model projections, we might assume that anthropogenic drying has only just begun," King, an assistant professor of physical geography at the University of Tennessee, told Newsweek. "Furthermore, we might expect the frequency of compound hot and dry conditions—hot drought—to increase over the course of this century." These hot temperatures have increased the soil moisture, which in turn has contributed to the severity and frequency of drought. The researchers have linked the notable increase in drought to human activities. "Individual climatic events can have serious effects on agriculture, infrastructure, and ecosystems, but compounding hazards can result in cascading and intensified consequences for these systems," the authors write in the study. They went on: "The combination of anomalous heat with rainfall deficits have already led to droughts that are substantially more intense because of high temperatures and elevated vapor pressure deficits and have thus been called hot droughts." The research is easy to believe, considering the severe effects of drought we are already seeing in the Western U.S. The region is facing a severe water crisis as megadrought continues to plague the area. The Colorado River Basin is seeing a concerning drop in water levels as drought causes a lack of seasonal precipitation. Important Colorado River reservoirs like Lake Mead are showing how dire the situation is. In the summer of 2022, the reservoir reached its lowest level ever recorded. Since then, the water levels have remained at only around 30 percent capacity. "The increasing prevalence of hot drought over the 20th and 21st centuries has important implications for future regional climate change adaptation strategies and for water resource management, particularly in the most historically drought-prone regions," the study said. "This study aims to evaluate the relationship between summer average maximum temperatures and summer soil moisture over the last 500 years," King said. "Our main research questions are, [firstly] how might we characterize or quantify the relationship between summer maximum temperature and summer soil moisture during this modern period of megadrought conditions for much of western North America compared to during past megadrought periods over the last 500 years? [And secondly,] has the frequency of compound hot and dry summers increased over the 20th-21st centuries compared to the past ca. 500 years?" Experts are already aware that drought is wreaking havoc across the globe. In December 2023, the United Nations reported that drought is starting to become an unprecedented planetary-scale emergency. At the time of this research, Daniel Tsegai, program officer at the global policy advocacy and regional cooperation unit at the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification, told Newsweek that drought is hitting many areas of the U.S. "Our research team is currently working to expand the Western North American Temperatures Atlas to provide complete spatiotemporal coverage of past summer temperature estimates for the North American continent, spanning at least the last 500 years," King said. "Completion of the full North American Temperature Atlas will allow for broader spatial comparisons of compound climate extremes though time."

'Medical Milestone' as Woman Gives Birth Using Her Mother's Womb.
Ababy has been born in Spain after growing inside the womb of its grandmother. The mother of the infant had received a womb transplant from her mother two years prior and successfully birthed a baby boy on January 2. The baby, named Manuel, therefore developed in the same womb that his mother also grew inside. "Before Manuel was born, I would talk to him and say: 'I was in here too, you'll be fine,'" the baby's mother, Maira, told Barcelona's Catalunya Ràdio. This marks the first time that a child in Spain has been born from a womb donated by its own grandmother. The first time that a baby was born from a mother-daughter womb transplant was in Sweden in 2014 when Emelie Eriksson gave birth to a son from her mother's womb at Sahlgrenska University Hospital of the University of Gothenburg. Maira wasn't able to get pregnant with her own uterus due to having a condition known as Mayer-Rokitansky-Küster-Hauser Syndrome, which is a rare congenital disorder that causes the underdevelopment of the female reproductive system. MRKH syndrome affects around one in every 4,500 women and is characterized by having a small or absent uterus and a shortened vagina. Those with MRKH usually cannot get pregnant. Maira and her mother contacted Hospital Clínic de Barcelona—which had been researching delivering babies from transplanted wombs—hoping to be able to do the same. "I thought: if I die, I will die happy, doing what I wanted or at least trying. And my mother said the same thing," she said. Womb transplants are incredibly complicated procedures, requiring a hysterectomy of the donor and recipient, followed by a successful installation of the donor uterus into the recipient. "Maira was once inside the uterus that is now inside her. It is a medical and scientific milestone that deserves great credit, and is the result of the expertise of an excellent team of professionals who made it possible. It is an absolute paradigm shift in medicine," Francisco Carmona, head of the Gynaecology Service at Hospital Clínic de Barcelona, said in a statement. Newsweek reached out to Hospital Clínic de Barcelona for comment. After the transplant in early 2022, Maira underwent fertility treatment to get pregnant, having grown several embryos from her eggs and her partner's sperm using in vitro fertilization. She became pregnant, and the baby was born via Cesarian section at 37 weeks. Uterine transplant patients are not advised to give birth vaginally. Only eight hospitals in the world perform this procedure, with this marking the second time that Spain has ever seen a baby born from a donated womb. This first procedure—resulting in a baby born in March 2023—involved a sister donating her womb, however, not a mother. A mother's donated womb is just as viable for pregnancy as a younger donor's, the doctors said. "The uterus is perfectly viable. If you give these [uteruses] hormones, they menstruate again and become perfectly normal. We're much more concerned that the donors are smokers than what age they might be," Carmona told Catalunya Ràdio. Maira and her family have since returned home to start their new lives, and Maira says that she hopes to have a second child soon.

Alcohol's Impact on Sleep Revealed in Nightcap Warning.
A glass of wine with dinner or a quick drink before bed can be a tempting way to relax and unwind after a long, stressful day. But, according to scientists, these twilight tipples are probably doing more harm than good. While a nightcap might help you fall asleep faster, alcohol has been shown to disrupt our natural sleep cycle, suppressing REM sleep in the first half of the night and increasing light sleep and wakefulness in the second half. "REM sleep, or rapid eye movement sleep, occupies about 20 percent of a typical night's sleep, increases across the night, and is the state of sleep from which dreams most commonly arise," Jared Saletin, a professor of psychiatry and human behavior at Brown University, told Newsweek. "While its exact functions are unknown, REM sleep has been linked to emotional regulation and mental health, as well as memory processing, and creativity. Decreased or altered REM sleep may have detrimental impact on these aspects of our lives." Katie McCullar, a post-doctoral fellow in neurology at Harvard Medical School who recently completed her Ph.D. at Brown University, added: "REM deficit has been associated with learning and memory impairment and mood disturbances to name a few." "We are still exploring the full range of effects that REM sleep deficit may cause," she told Newsweek. In a recent study, published in the journal Sleep, McCullar, Saletin and their colleagues at Brown explored the effects of alcohol on the structure of our sleep, and how this effect can accumulate over time. To explore these effects, the team recruited 30 adult participants to spend three consecutive nights hooked up to a brain activity monitor while they slept. The experiment was repeated twice for each individual, but each time they were given a different pre-bed beverage. In one experiment, they were given a mixer; in the other, alcohol plus that same mixer, one hour before lights out. "Our study was novel in its repeated night design," Saletin said. "We found it interesting that the changes to sleep persisted across multiple nights when each was preceded by a drinking episode. Sleep did not seem to 'adapt.'" In line with previous studies, alcohol before sleep was associated with a significant, cumulative decrease in REM sleep. Indeed, according to the Sleep Foundation, even low amounts of alcohol—that is less than two drinks for men and less than one drink for women—can decrease sleep quality by up to 9.3 percent. "Our study explored relatively low levels of alcohol (targeting the legal limit of 0.08) and still discovered quite an effect," McCullar, the study's first author, said. Saletin added: "We do not know if there is a safe amount to drink without altering sleep. This is an important next question to answer. Future studies should consider how these effects are impacted by consumption rates which include those considered 'under the legal limit.'" Of course, this does not mean that your sleep cycle will be destroyed after a single, one-off drink on a Friday night. "Although our study indicates that alcohol impacts sleep architecture, it is important to note that the brain has the ability to compensate for a night or two of bad sleep, so a drink or two every now or then is (most likely!) okay," McCullar said. The team hope that their research will help inform public health signaling about the effects of drinking before bed. "Sleep is critical for so many aspects of our mental and physical health," Saletin said. "I hope this study draws attention to how our daily habits, like the common act of drinking in the evening, may alter sleep in meaningful ways. I hope our work helps individuals stay mindful of getting a good night of sleep."

Alzheimer's May Begin With Weird Vision Problems.
Scientists have discovered an early-warning sign for Alzheimer's disease that they hope may support earlier and more effective treatment. About 5.8 million Americans live with Alzheimer's, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention says. The progressive disease is the most common form of dementia and is associated with memory loss and cognitive decline in regions of the brain involved in memory, thought and language. Alzheimer's is thought to be caused by an abnormal buildup of proteins in and around the cells in our brains, but exactly what triggers this process is still unclear. Today, there is no known cure for Alzheimer's. However, medications have been developed that may offer relief to patients and slow down the development of symptoms, particularly if the disease is detected early. In a study published in The Lancet: Neurology journal, a team of University of California, San Francisco, (UCSF) researchers uncovered the early symptom, which may occur in up to 1 in 10 Alzheimer's cases: weird vision. Specifically, a condition called posterior cortical atrophy (PCA), which affects our ability to judge distances, distinguish between moving and stationary objects, and complete tasks like writing and retrieving dropped objects, despite having normal results in an eye examination. In its study, the team investigated 1,000 patients from 16 countries who had experienced PCA and found that 94 percent of them also had some sort of Alzheimer's disease biomarker. By contrast, previous studies have shown that just 70 percent of patients with memory loss—a symptom often associated with Alzheimer's—show biomarkers for the disease. The study highlights the importance of raising awareness of this condition among clinicians and patients. "We need more awareness of PCA so that it can be flagged by clinicians," Marianne Chapleau, the study's co-first author and a researcher at the UCSF Department of Neurology, said in a statement. "Most patients see their optometrist when they start experiencing visual symptoms and may be referred to an ophthalmologist, who may also fail to recognize PCA. We need better tools in clinical settings to identify these patients early on and get them treatment," Chapleau said. More research into the mechanisms behind PCA will also be essential, not only for advancing patient care but also for understanding the processes that drive Alzheimer's. "It's critical that doctors learn to recognize the syndrome so patients can receive the correct diagnosis, counseling and care," the study's lead author, Gil Rabinovici, said in a statement.

California's Largest Reservoir Sees Water Levels Continue To Swell.
California's largest reservoir has raised its dam gates as water continues to swell following heavy rainfall in the state. A deluge of rainfall in the western U.S. has seen Shasta Lake rise by nearly 10 feet in the last week alone. The level began to rise on January 17. Just under a week ago, its water levels were at 1,015.41 feet. Now, as of January 22, its water levels stand at 1,024.19. The Sacramento River is the principal river of Northern California. Its drainage basin received much of the rain that soaked California over the last weekend and can expect more in the coming week. Last weekend a total of 1.71 inches of rain fell on Downtown Sacramento, near the end of the river's course, while neighboring El Dorado County saw 1.87 inches, according to Fox40. The Upper Sacramento River feeds into Lake Shasta. California's largest reservoir, this body of water was formed by the damming of the river in the early 1940s. The level of Lake Shasta is heavily influenced by precipitation patterns, as about 90 percent of its supply comes from rain water. The recent spike in precipitation means that the Lake is not far from being completely full. When this happens, the dam's gates are raised, to prevent any spill over. The Bureau of Reclamation is not concerned about it causing any flooding just yet. Don Bader, an area manager for the agency, told local radio station KRCRTV that there is still room for 10 feet of water before they have to start considering flood measures. Newsweek has contacted the bureau via email for further information. It is hard to believe that in 2022, this reservoir was one of many in a dire situation due to severe drought conditions. But at the beginning of 2023, its water levels began to recover due to a particularly wet winter. This provided some much-needed storage for not just Shasta, but for other California lakes. At the beginning of January 2022, Lake Shasta's water levels were at a concerning 913.48 feet. The lake was not alone. Many of the reservoirs in the western U.S. were suffering due to a megadrought affecting the area. Experts put the prolonged drought conditions down to climate change, which caused a lack of seasonal rainfall. By April, when storms had stopped and the surrounding snowpack had melted, it had risen to around 1,051 feet. At this point, Jeff Mount, a senior fellow at the Public Policy Institute of California's Water Policy Center, told Newsweek that reservoirs statewide were "generally in good shape with most at or above their historical averages and some reservoirs having to let significant water go to maintain space for floods." The water in Lake Shasta is important for a variety of reasons as it is used for irrigation as well as hydropower generation. Despite the recent recovery in water levels, experts are still wary that the situation could deteriorate again in the future. It remains to be seen how the rest of 2024 will look for the reservoir.

Fusion Boost From Liquid Shield Brings Near-Unlimited Clean Energy Closer.
Commercial fusion energy may be one step closer thanks to a recent development reactor design by researchers at Princeton's Plasma Physics Laboratory (PPPL). The researchers hope that their discovery will lead to smaller, less expensive fusion reactors in the future. But first, what is fusion? Nuclear fusion is a process that creates energy in the same way as our sun. It involves the smashing together of two atoms with such force that they combine into a single, larger atom, and release huge amounts of energy in the process. Unlike nuclear fission—the nuclear reaction that is currently used in the energy sector—fusion promises not to create radioactive waste. It would produce three to four times more energy than fission and would not release carbon dioxide into the atmosphere like fossil fuels. Fusion is also a very fragile process that will shut down in a fraction of a second if the correct conditions are not maintained. Therefore, there would be no risk of nuclear meltdown from this reaction. However, for it to take place, we need to be able to mimic the conditions at the center of the sun. And, unsurprisingly, that takes a lot of energy. In fact, to create this reaction on Earth, temperatures need to be at least six times hotter than the center of the sun! Another issue is how to confine these superhot particles in a small enough space for them to easily bump into each other. And this is where research into nuclear fusion splits into two branches: lasers and magnetic confinement. In both cases, the atoms involved are heated to super-high temperatures and confined in a small area, which forces them to fuse. At these temperatures, atoms exist in a state called a plasma, which is basically a soup of negatively charged electrons and positively charged ions that have been ripped apart by the extremely hot temperature of their surroundings. And it is this plasma that must be contained. In the Princeton study, run on behalf of the U.S. Department of Energy, researchers used a device called a tokamak, a donut-shaped contraption that contains the plasma using strong magnetic fields. "The purpose of these devices is to confine the energy," Dennis Boyle, a staff research physicist at PPPL, said in a statement. "If you had much better energy confinement, you could make the machines smaller and less expensive. That would make the whole thing a lot more practical, and cost-effective so that governments and industry want to invest more in it." In today's tokamaks, the plasma can often become cooler towards its edges, losing energy and making the overall reaction less efficient. But now, the team at PPPL has discovered that a simple coating on the reactor's walls could help keep the plasma's edges hot. And this simple coating is liquid lithium. "The results...have been very promising," Richard Majeski, managing principal research physicist at PPPL, said in a statement. "Liquid lithium not only provides a wall that can withstand contact with a 2 million-degree plasma, it actually improves the performance of the plasma." According to the researchers, this coating also acts as a shield for the reactor's inner walls, reducing the need for repairs and maintenance. But how does this lithium coating work? Well, inside the plasma, hydrogen ions—hydrogen atoms ripped of their electrons—are moving around at a rapid pace. Some of these can jump out of the plasma and stick the walls of the reactor. Without the lithium coating, these may be reflected back into the plasma, but only after a significant chunk of their energy has been absorbed by the vessel's walls. This, therefore, removes heat energy from the plasma. What the lithium coating does is it reduces the amount of hydrogen that can bounce back into the plasma, absorbing around 40 percent of all the hydrogen ions that were able to escape. "This work at Princeton shows that...an advantage might be obtained with a lithium wall," Amanda Quadling, director of materials research at the U.K. Atomic Energy Authority, told Newsweek. "The outcomes add real value to a community which must inevitably engage with lithium as the key fuel substrate." However, Quadling added that lithium is not an easy element to work with. For one, using liquid lithium on the walls of a larger reactor would be difficult and expensive. Majeski echoed this sentiment, stating that smaller reactors may be required to successfully incorporate this technology: "In order to move confidently ahead with liquid lithium walls in a future phase of [our tokamak reactor,] exploratory experiments at a smaller scale are essential." 
New Species of Snake Found Hiding in Cloud Forests.
Abrand new species of snake has been discovered lurking in cloud forests of Ecuador. The new species is a type of coffee snake, and has been named the Tudors's Coffee Snake, or Ninia guytudori, in honor of naturalist and and scientific illustrator Guy Tudor, according to a new paper in the journal Evolutionary Systematics. The new species has been identified after years of being confused with members of other species, such as N. atrata and N. teresitae. "Specimens of Ninia guytudori sp. nov. have been found active at night on leaf-litter in old-growth cloud forest. During the daytime, they have been found hidden under rotten logs. When threatened, individuals flatten the body and tail," the study said.
It was discovered slithering around cloud forests in Ecuador, which are moist, mossy, evergreen forests found at elevations between 1,600 and 13,000 feet above sea level. Only around one percent of global forest is cloud forest, most of which is found in Central and South America, East and Central Africa, Southeast Asia and islands in the Pacific. Around 2.4 percent of cloud forest area worldwide was lost between 2001 and 2018, mostly due to deforestation by logging and mining practices. This loss of habitat means that many species of coffee snake native to cloud forests are often found in coffee plantations, hence their name. The Tudors's Coffee Snake in particular is found along the Pacific slopes of the Andes in northwest Ecuador, at elevations between 3,200 and 4,900 feet above sea level. The species was found in Ecuador's Pichincha province by biologist Alejandro Arteaga, who was looking for animals to include in a book about the reptiles of Ecuador. "The specific epithet guytudori is a patronym honoring Guy Tudor, an all-around naturalist and scientific illustrator with a deep fondness for birds and all animals, in recognition of the impact he has had on the conservation of South America's birds through his artistry," the authors wrote. The deforestation of the cloud forests may threaten the future of this newly discovered species. "We consider Ninia guytudori sp. nov. to be included in the Near Threatened conservation category following the IUCN criteria, because the species has been recorded in more than 10 localities and it is distributed over an area which retains the majority (around 53 percent) of its forest cover," the authors said. "Therefore, the species is facing no major immediate extinction threats. However, some populations are likely to be declining due to deforestation by logging and large-scale mining, especially in the province Imbabura, where only two populations of the species are known." The authors of the paper hope that the discovery of this species proves the importance of preserving the cloud forest ecosystem, and will also help preserve coffee plantations nearby that help to support the species and others like it. 

Man Finds Prehistoric Hilltop Tomb With 'Sun Altar' Lost for 180 Years.
Aprehistoric hilltop tomb that was lost for around 180 years has been rediscovered by a local man in County Kerry on the Atlantic coast of Ireland. Folklorist Billy Mag Fhloinn uncovered the tomb's location on a hill overlooking the village of Baile an Fheirtéaraigh (also known as Ballyferriter) on the Dingle Peninsula in the southwest of the country. The peninsula, which juts out into the Atlantic Ocean, is home to a number of prehistoric remains. The existence of a tomb close to Baile an Fheirtéaraigh was recorded in 19th-century antiquarian literature. But its exact location had been lost to history since the last known record of it, which was made in 1838, Caimin O'Brien, an archaeologist with Ireland's National Monuments Service, told Newsweek. The tomb, known locally as the Altóir na Gréine ("the sun altar"), is also thought to have been destroyed sometime between 1838 and 1852 when its stones vanished. It is possible that they were broken and carried away to be used as building material. A local antiquarian who visited the site in 1852 recorded that there were no remains left of the tomb, which is a type of megalith—a class of prehistoric monuments constructed using large stones—O'Brien said. Mag Fhloinn had long been fascinated by the last record of the tomb from 1838, a sketch drawn by Lady Chatterton, an English aristocrat, traveler and author who visited the region that year. She published the sketch, which shows the monument intact, in her 1839 guidebook to the area called Rambles In The South Of Ireland During The Year 1838. In her travelogue, she wrote the following description of the tomb alongside the sketch: "On the top of the hill were the remains of a very curious piece of antiquity, once an altar, supposed to have been used for offering sacrifices to the sun. We heartily wished we could have had an opportunity of telling the sun, before hand, of our intention of visiting his altar; for a more thick, penetrating rain I think never was experienced, than fell to our lot while poking over the remain of the old stones, and taking the sketch which is here given." Mag Fhloinn was exploring a hill known as Cruach Mhárthain in search of the lost tomb when he noticed a number of orthostats (large upright stones) and a large capstone that turned out to be part of the monument's structure. This was surprising, given that people had assumed the whole tomb had been destroyed. "I knew there was a lost site of Altóir na Gréine on the hill somewhere. So I started to walk the hill in search of it, covering a large area. Eventually, these stones caught my eye. Then, when I took a closer look, I saw that the features on one of the stones perfectly matched an orthostat in the sketch from 1838," Mag Fhloinn told Irish public broadcaster RTÉ, which first reported the discovery. The folklorist informed the National Monuments Service, which dispatched O'Brien to inspect the site. The archaeologists subsequently confirmed that the remains represented the lost Altóir na Gréine tomb. It will now be added to the database of national monuments. According to O'Brien, the monument is a type of prehistoric "wedge tomb," several of which have been previously found on the Dingle Peninsula and across the wider region. These tombs consist of a long burial gallery, sometimes with an antechamber or small closed end-chamber. They are generally broader and higher at the front, which invariably faces in a westerly direction. They are roofed by slabs laid directly on the side walls, which often have one or more rows of outer walling. Evidence from the small number of examples that have been excavated to date suggests that they were being built between 2,500 B.C. and 2,000 B.C., representing the last phase of megalithic tomb construction in Ireland, O'Brien said. No excavation has been carried out at Altóir na Gréine. But both cremated and unburnt human remains have been found at other wedge tombs in Ireland. "[These tombs] are usually positioned on high ground, but not the highest point. There's often certain alignments associated with them. Quite often the opening tends to look towards the west, or the south, or the southwest," Mag Fhloinn told RTÉ. "Usually you will find cremated remains of people inside and they probably represent the burial place of a significant family or community group. But they could have been used for other things as well, ceremonies and rituals for example. They may have cosmological and astronomical significance in the case where they are facing the setting sun in the west and southwest." The rediscovery of the hilltop site means archaeologists will now be able to study the tomb and compare it to others, which may provide better insights into the prehistoric peoples of this region who built such monuments. "The monument siting has extensive views of the sea to the west and would have provided the tomb builders with a panoramic view of the sun setting into the sea. [This] may have been one of the reasons why they chose this siting for the burial tomb," O'Brien said. Given the local name of the tomb and its apparent northwest/southeast orientation, archaeologists will be keen to find out if the monument is aligned with the sun in any way. A 1938 manuscript preserved in the Irish Folklore Collection contains lore describing the "eastern sun hitting the tomb at sunrise"—a possible indication of a winter solstice alignment.

Animals Should Get 'Right To Vote,' Legal Researcher Argues.
Animals should have voting rights, a legal researcher has suggested. A paper published in the journal Analysis by Ioan-Radu Motoarcă, an associate at Ashman Law Offices in Illinois, reported that extending voting rights to animals would merely be extending practices that are already in place, where "certain governments permit the enforcement of animals' legal rights through representatives." "Before defending this view, it is worth emphasizing two features of the proposal I have in mind," Motoarcă wrote in the study. "First, the system of animal voting I am envisaging would involve appointed representatives casting votes on behalf of animals." For example, there are already representatives for children, or people with mental disabilities, when it comes to legal issues. According to Motoarcă, animals should have the same luxury. "The idea that animals should have the right to vote sounds preposterous. Accordingly, most authors who have touched on the issue dismiss it in few words as obviously absurd," the study read. "However, I will argue that we can understand this idea as a natural outcome of our fundamental democratic commitments. Consequently, I believe governments should recognize a political right to vote for at least certain categories of animals." To give animals voting rights would be to follow the "all affected interests" principle, the study added. This principle goes by the understanding that anyone who is affected by the policies of a government should, in theory, have a say in that government. "If you are a supporter of democracy (as opposed to some other political arrangement), and if you really reflect on the best reasons we have for including or excluding certain categories of beings from our democratic community—think about the historical treatment of minorities in the political process—it is not going to be easy to exclude animals from that community," Motoarcă told Newsweek. "Otherwise, of course, there might be independent reasons why giving animals voting rights is a good idea. For example, it may contribute to a decrease in animal suffering. Hence, if you think animal suffering is bad, then a decrease in suffering would be a good thing." While the idea may still seem absurd, Motoarcă noted that governments did not always allow basic voting rights to many people, including women and slaves. The study said there would have been what seemed like "obvious justifications at the time." People may still argue that animals are physically not able to vote, or comprehend a government's policies. However, Motoarcă reiterated that this is not a good enough reason to not allow them a say. "A lot is going to depend on how exactly such a proposal is implemented. For instance, who will be acting as animal representatives?" Motoarcă said. "I think it would be important to maintain neutrality here, so that the representatives would be neutral persons who do not have any particular axe to grind and can assess the scientific evidence rationally. Even if complete neutrality is unlikely, that would still be the ideal standard. Another important area of future research is what to do when the interests of various groups of animals are in conflict, because a policy may benefit some while harming others. Those are going to be tough decisions, but it doesn't mean they would be impossible to make. After all, legislators vote on policies that benefit some groups of people while harming others all the time."

Bronze Jewelry Find Shines Light on Ancient Lake Ritual.
An excavation of a dried-out lake has unveiled 550 bronze artifacts and skeletal remains from over 3,000 years ago, shedding light on an ancient ritual. These artifacts, discovered in the Papowo Biskupie lake bed in Poland, provide valuable insight into rituals performed by a group of people living in the regions at the time, known as the Chelmno group. These people lived between 1200 BC to 450 BC, across the Late Bronze Age and the Early Iron Age. Findings from the excavation are published in a new Antiquity study. The group was part of the Lusatian culture, which was widespread across what is now Poland, at the time. However unlike other Lusatians, the Chelmno group were not thought to place much ritual significance on these kinds of metal artifacts. This most recent excavation has proved this theory wrong. The artifacts excavated alongside human remains suggests a link between burial and metal rituals, which were usually made in large bodies of water. "Traditionally, the Chełmno group people are thought to have been largely unaffected by the social and economic developments of the Urnfield period and the subsequent Hallstatt culture," the authors wrote. "In contrast with the widespread metal-hoarding seen in more southerly Lusatian regions, metal does not appear to have featured prominently in the social and ritual activities of the Chełmno community." Most of the artifacts uncovered appeared to be arm and neck jewelry, the study reported, as well as what could have been a woman's outfit. The remains of 33 humans appeared to have been put in the lake before the metal was, suggesting that the dead were buried here before the metal rituals were made. So, it appears that while the Chelmno group differed in many ways from others in Lusatian culture, it seems the ritual practices and their belief system aligned later on, the study reported. This new research has completely changed archeologists' perception of these ancient people. They have dubbed this finding "one of the most eloquent testimonies of ritual activity from the Lusatian period in Poland." "To sum up, Papowo Biskupie opens a new window for exploring the social and ritual practices of the Lusatian era in Poland and demonstrates the potential of this place to offer a better understanding of the complex interplay between votive depositions and human sacrifice," the authors wrote. Discoveries from the Bronze and Iron age are being found all the time. Each new finding brings archeologists closer to discovering more about the way these ancient people lived.

Dementia Risk Lowered by Six Habits, Study Suggests. 
Adopting six simple lifestyle habits could significantly reduce your risk of dementia, scientists have said. Dementia affects over 5 million American adults over the age of 65, according to 2014 data from the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The condition comes in different forms—the most common of which is Alzheimer's disease—and is characterized by an impaired ability to remember, think and make decisions. The condition occurs when cells in the brain and the connections between stop working properly. And this can result from a combination of factors. Certain genetic variants may increase our risk of developing dementia, but our lifestyle and habits also appear to play a significant role. Numerous studies have highlighted a link between cardiometabolic diseases—such as heart disease, stroke, hypertension and type 2 diabetes—with accelerated cognitive decline. But whether this can be offset by a healthy lifestyle has previously been unclear. In a new study, published in the Journal of Affective Disorders, researchers from Beijing examined 2,537 participants over the age of 60. Participants were given a physical examination to determine their weight, height and blood pressure, as well as tests for cognitive function and cardiometabolic diseases. Finally, they were surveyed on their adherence to six lifestyle factors which had previously been identified to support brain health: physical exercise, social interaction, leisure activities, sleep quality, smoking status and alcohol consumption. Each participant was given an overall lifestyle score in which each of these factors contributed one point. In total, the team found that each one-point increase in the participants' overall lifestyle score was associated with an 18 percent reduced risk of early cognitive decline. This cumulative scoring system suggests that a combination of lifestyle factors, rather than any single factor, may be responsible for this slowed rate of cognitive decline. "A healthier lifestyle is associated with a significant reduced risk of early cognitive decline, but lifestyle changes can't be piecemeal," the study's joint lead authors, Haowei Li of the National Clinical Research Center for Geriatrics Diseases, and Shige Qi from the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention, said in a statement. "The most beneficial protective effect is seen when clustering multiple lifestyle factors together, showing just how powerful exercise, socializing, sleeping, and healthy consumption habits are in combination." Another recently published study has suggested a new method for detecting dementia five to 10 years before symptoms start to develop. Researchers from the University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio—together with colleagues from the University of California, Davis, and Boston University—studied MRI scans from 1,500 participants aged between the ages of 70 and 74. From this data, the team saw that a ribbon of brain tissues, known as cortical gray matter, grows thinner in those who go on to develop dementia, and appears to be an accurate biomarker of the disease long before the development of symptoms. This discovery offers hope to millions of people across the U.S. as early diagnosis is essential for effective treatment and slowing the disease progression.

Skin Lightening Warning as Cream Turns Woman's Face Bluish-Brown.
A woman's skin has turned a bizarre blue-brown color after using skin-lightening cream. This condition, known as exogenous ochronosis, had been affecting the 55-year-old patient for a year before she came into the hospital in Vadodara, India. The woman has been applying a skin-lightening cream containing the skin-bleaching agent hydroquinone to treat patches of hyperpigmentation or melasma on her cheeks. However, now those regions have turned blue-brown, as shown by a case report in the New England Journal of Medicine. "She had started applying a skin-lightening cream containing hydroquinone to her face daily to treat melasma," authors Nikita Patel and Hiral Shah of Government Medical College Baroda, India, wrote in the case study. "On physical examination, bluish-brown patches with background erythema [skin reddening] and telangiectasias [widened blood vessels] were observed on the cheeks, nasal bridge, and perioral region [around the mouth], with lesser involvement on the forehead." Exogenous ochronosis is a type of dermatitis caused by the application of hydroquinone or phenols to the skin. When skin affected by the condition is viewed under a microscope, it appears yellowish-ochre in color but seems blue-brown with the naked eye due to the scattering of light. "It is the delayed effect of prolonged application of hydroquinone that on photo- oxidation, there is local competitive inhibition of the enzyme homogentisic oxidase by hydroquinone, which leads to local accumulation of homogentisic acid and its metabolic products that polymerizes and binds to connective tissue macromolecules to form the so-called typical ochronotic pigment in the papillary dermis, further destroying the collagen and elastic fibers," Patel said. "This deposition is in dermis, so the hyperpigmentation is difficult to treat." Hydroquinone has been banned in cosmetic creams in the European Union since 2000 due to its potential side effects and was nearly banned by the FDA in 2006. Around 10 to 15 million skin-lightening products are bought annually worldwide, with Japan having one of the largest markets for the products. Using hydroquinone for longer increases the risk of developing exogenous ochronosis, especially if used in areas of the body that are exposed to the sun. It can be very hard to get rid of, with most treatments being preventative. Some studies have found that a Q-switched alexandrite (755 nm) laser could be used to treat the condition. "Exogenous ochronosis is challenging to treat and may not be reversible. Counseling regarding the importance of photoprotection and cessation of the use of the skin cream was given to the patient. A topical emollient and retinoid gel were also prescribed," the authors explain. However, two months after coming into the hospital, the woman saw very little change in the level of pigmentation of her skin. "At 2 months of follow-up, the patient had minimal abatement of the hyperpigmentation," the authors wrote.

Tea Drinkers May Age Slower, Scientists Reveal.
Could you slow the aging process with this basic beverage? Many factors contribute to aging, and diet is no exception. From our skin to our cells, the food we eat supplies a range of essential nutrients that can support our body's microbial machinery and help us to live longer, healthier lives. One beverage that has shown promising results in this area is tea. And while tea drinking might be a stereotypically British behavior, the beverage can be found in almost 80 percent of U.S. households, according to the Tea Association of the U.S.A. In 2021, Americans drank more than 3.9 billion gallons of the stuff, equating to almost 85 billion servings. Animal studies have suggested that the plant-based compounds in tea, called polyphenols, may increase the lifespan of worms, flies and mice, while studies in humans have found that tea consumption is associated with a reduced risk of various age-related diseases, including heart disease, diabetes, dementia and cancer. However, very few studies have looked into the relationship between tea consumption and biological aging. In a new study, published in the journal The Lancet Regional Health—Western Pacific, researchers from China's Sichuan University sought to investigate the role of tea consumption in longevity, using data from nearly 14,000 participants aged between 30 and 79. Participants were quizzed on the number of cups of tea they drank every day and assessed for basic biomarkers indicative of aging. The participants were then assessed in a follow-up study two to four years later. From this data, an obvious pattern emerged—tea consumption was associated with slower biological aging, particularly for consistent tea drinkers drinking moderate amounts. "The relationship suggested that consuming around three cups of tea, or 6 to 8 grams of tea leaves per day, may offer the most evident anti-aging benefits," the authors write. Of course, this correlation does not necessarily imply causation, but there are a number of molecules inside tea that might be behind these potential anti-aging properties. Tea is rich in polyphenols and antioxidants, which are thought to play a role in reducing inflammation, mopping up toxic byproducts of cellular reactions and increasing cell turnover. Polyphenols have also been reported to play an important role in supporting our gut microbiome, with implications for metabolism, immunity and cognitive function. However, more research is needed to confirm which molecules could be behind this anti-aging association. But the study provides exciting evidence for tea as a nutrition-based approach to slowing down the aging process and potentially lowering our risk of age-associated disease. "Our findings highlight the potential role of tea in developing nutrition-oriented anti-aging interventions and guiding healthy aging policies," the authors say.

Dolphins Are Trying To Kill Baby Manatees—And Scientists Don't Know Why.
Dolphins have been attacking the babies of their cousin species, the manatees, scientists have found. This strange aggressive behavior has been spotted 10 times over the course of over two decades, with the large majority of instances occurring in the past eight years according to a new st udy in the journal PLOS One. The bottlenose dolphins were seen to target manatee calves that had been orphaned, as well as those still with their mothers. The interactions left many of them injured and covered in rake marks from the dolphins' teeth. One even succumbed to its injuries. "We report 10 cases of interactions between bottlenose dolphins and Antillean manatee calves along the coast of Belize in the Caribbean Sea. We observed dolphins interact with manatee babies in various ways, sometimes swimming with the baby calmly and in other cases, getting aggressive with calves and biting and hitting them. Four of the 10 cases we documented involved manatee babies that were recovered and had dolphin bite marks on them," Eric Angel Ramos, study author and researcher at the Fundación Internacional para la Naturaleza y la Sustentabilidad, told Newsweek. These attacks were recorded off the coast of Belize in South America between 1999 and 2020. Most of them occurred between 2015 and 2020. "There were seven interactions we saw between dolphins and baby manatees, and four that we found with bite marks, with one that we saw interacting with dolphins and found with bite marks. Two of them we saw with a drone were manatee mothers with their calves. In all other cases, the manatees were orphaned and not found with mothers. We know that four of the babies had bite marks and one that was injured badly and later died of an infection likely associated with industries. We can't say for sure how many were actually injured," Ramos said. Bottlenose dolphins are highly social animals, living in large pods, and are considered to be one of the most intelligent species in the world. While many of the dolphins' interactions with the manatees resulted in the manatees being injured, the researchers weren't entirely sure if they always wanted to inflict harm. In one of the cases, several of the dolphins were seen swimming alongside the calf and push it toward the surface, while others rammed the manatee and launched it into the air. This and other cases where the manatee was pushed toward the surface could be interpreted as an attempt to care for the calf. "We don't know if they are really trying to hurt them or not. Dolphins play rough. They don't have hands, so when they socialize or mate or play, they tend to bite each other and hit each other with their tails," Ramos said. "They may be treating manatees roughly but not actually trying to hurt them. However, bottlenose dolphins are also known to kill baby dolphins of their species, and probably others. So the drive to attack and kill young could help explain how they treat babies of other species." This behavior has been seen several times in the wild, with one pod of orcas—also a species of dolphin—seemingly adopting a pilot whale calf. Alternatively, the dolphins may have been attempting to steal or kidnap the calf. "Bottlenose dolphins have been reported doing it to other species of dolphin. They regularly interact with other species of marine mammals, and in some cases, they kill other species," Ramos explained. "For example, in the U.K. and along the coast of California, they kill porpoises. In lots of other places they are know to get aggressive with other species of dolphins and other marine mammal species. But it's really hard to understand these interactions because you don't see them a lot and it's difficult to determine who is involved and what the context of the interaction is." The dolphins' aggression towards the manatees may stem from a perception of them as competition for food or other resources. Bottlenose dolphins have also been seen to act aggressively with a number of other species that they share a range with. More research needs to be done to fully understand why the dolphins keep doing this, and what triggers them to approach the manatee. "We do lots of studies of manatees on dolphins throughout the Caribbean. Some of these involve studying how manatees use their habitats throughout the country, using tools like drones to photo identify them from the air and track their behavior. We also use acoustic recorders deployed in dolphin and manatee habitats to study how they communicate and what is important to them in their habitats," Ramos said. "The take home message is that dolphins show complex behaviors and sometimes they interact with other species in ways similar to the way they interact with each other, and that can be aggressive and sometimes lead to injuries."

US Bigfoot Sightings May Have a Simple Explanation.
Scientists have uncovered new information about the infamous Bigfoot, revealing important insights into its most-likely identity. Bigfoot, or the sasquatch, is a legendary ape-like beast that has been spotted all over North America. People say the creature is tall and hairy, roaming through the nation's forests on two legs. Indeed, these eyewitness accounts number in the thousands, according to the Bigfoot Field Researchers Organization, making the creature a prominent cryptozoological phenomenon across the United States. However, while there are likely to be many undescribed species in our nation's forests, most scientists agree that the majority of Bigfoot sightings can be explained by a more-familiar creature: the black bear. The black bear, as known as Ursus americanus, is the most-common bear species in the United States. Its range spreads across Canada, the U.S. and northern Mexico, and the black bear can be found in forested areas, mountains, swamps, scrub and even more urban settings. The large, stocky animals can weigh up to 660 pounds and measure up to 6.6 feet long, but, despite its large size, the bear can run at speeds of up to 35 miles per hour and can often be seen walking on its hind legs. The presence of a black bear can be indicated by signs such as overturned logs and stones, broken branches, claw marks, dark hair and big footprints. They are often active at night and can be heard vocalizing with grunts, howls, snorts and roars. Already, these features are match up well with the majority of Bigfoot sightings, but there's more. In a new study, published in the Journal of Zoology, Floe Foxon, founder of the Folk Zoology Society, has demonstrated a close correlation between Bigfoot sightings and black-bear populations across the U.S. and Canada. After adjusting for human population and forested areas, Foxon found that an average of one Bigfoot sighting can be expected every year for every 5,000 bears across the United States. This can be translated to a 4 percent increase in Bigfoot sightings with every additional 1,000 bears in the U.S. "This is logical because [...] bears and sasquatch share many characteristics in habitat, appearance, attributes and behavior," Foxon writes. "Poor viewing conditions, non-expert observation, and expectant attention—'seeing' what one anticipates— could explain why some people might confused bears for mystery hominids." Foxon adds that Bigfoot sightings might be useful for future black-bear conservation efforts, allowing experts to gain information about bear populations through data from citizen scientists.

Weird Cat Behaviors You Should Pay Attention to Revealed.
Cats make for very entertaining pets due to their occasionally strange behavior, but it can be hard to know what is normal and what is not. New research has now found what is unusual and what is considered normal, as well as what could be a cause for concern for owners. The study published in the Journal of Veterinary Behavior by scientists from a number of different institutions assessed 816 cat owners and asked them to fill out a survey specially designed to analyze their pets' behavior. The researchers found that cats being curious about new objects or surroundings was very common, having been reported in 82 percent of cases. Purring when being stroked was also very common, accounting for around 81 percent of those studied. Behaviors that were identified as never or seldom happening by more than 90 percent of owners included spraying (standing position with tail raised vertically) outside of the litterbox or on surfaces, sudden frantic licking or chewing, pacing or growling and hissing. "Understanding normal behavior helps improve animal welfare, and especially so with cats, whose antics can be as mystifying as they are cute," the study's lead author, David J. Menor-Campos of the Universidad de Córdoba in Spain, said in a summary of the findings. "When cat owners understand what's normal and what's abnormal for their pet, they can spot warning signs and address behavioral or health issues before they become too severe." It also appeared that female cats were more likely to act aggressively and got scared more easily. Male cats, however, appeared friendlier and more sociable to humans. They were also more vocal than females. A cat's behavior was also linked to their surroundings. Those that lived in a rural setting, for example, were less playful and were more likely to hunt than those living in smaller apartments. Overall, the study concluded that "there are significant differences in cats' behavior related to various factors, including the cat's breed, sex, reproductive status, age of acquisition, source of acquisition, and the environment in which they live." "Other factors that may affect cat behavior include the type of home, sleep preferences, time alone, and the presence of other pets in the household," the authors wrote. As one of the most popular pets, the authors noted that these findings should help owners distinguish worrying behaviors more efficiently. Behavior issues are "quite common among domestic cats," the study reports, but owners are "often reluctant to ask for help when their relationship with their cat is in difficulty. "Increasing knowledge about cat behavior is likely to be beneficial for both current and future cat owners, as it enables them to make informed decisions when deciding to acquire a cat or when dealing with an existing one," the authors wrote. "Moreover, clinicians can detect changes in behavior that may indicate medical conditions or welfare issues and provide proper guidance to cat owners." Newsweek has contacted Menor-Campos by email for further information.

Colors We See Fade as We Age, Study Finds.
The colors we see may get increasingly dull as we get older, scientists have found. The pupils of younger people's eyes react differently to bright colors than those of older folk, a new paper in the journal Scientific Reports reveals."This work brings into question the long-held belief among scientists that color perception remains relatively constant across the lifespan, and suggests instead that colors slowly fade as we age. Our findings might also help explain why our color preferences may alter as we age, and why at least some older people may prefer to dress in bold colors," study author Janneke van Leeuwen said in a statement. She is a neurodegenerative disease researcher at the University College London (UCL) Queen Square Institute of Neurology in the United Kingdom. The pupil of the eye tends to constrict or get smaller when exposed to bright colors. In the paper, the authors describe how they compared how the pupils of 17 younger and 20 older people reacted to being exposed to 26 different colors for 5 seconds each. The colors included a variety of bright and dull shades, including four greyscale colors, two oranges, and dark, muted, saturated and light shades of magenta, blue, green, yellow and red. The scientists found that the older people's pupils constricted less to brighter colors than the younger group, especially for green and magenta shades. The reaction to the lightness of a hue was unchanged between age cohorts, however. "In our study, we looked at how color perception is affected by aging by looking at the effects of the intensity (saturation) and the lightness of colors on pupil responses of healthy young and older adults," van Leeuwen told Newsweek. "The results showed that the pupils of older adults responded the same as young adults to the lightness level of colors but less strongly to the saturation of colors. This suggests that our brains become less sensitive to the intensity of colors in the world around us." Therefore, the brains of older people can be concluded to be less sensitive to the brightness of colors. This is supported by previous work that found older people see surface color as less colorful than younger adults. This may be because aging comes with a decline in the primary visual cortex's sensitivity to color saturation. This is a part of the brain that processes visual information from the eyes. A form of dementia known as posterior cortical atrophy (PCA) can result in similar symptoms of difficulty in color perception. This may result from a reduction in the brain's sensitivity to specific colors. "Pupil responses are not regulated by the eye, but by structures in the midbrain. It has been shown that pupil dynamics are aligned with the transmission of visual information between the retina of the eye and the brain. This means that studying pupil responses to colors can tell us something about how color information is conveyed between the eye and the visual cortex (and higher cortical areas)," van Leeuwen said. "Our findings could have wide implications for how we adapt fashion, décor and other color 'spaces' for older people, and potentially even for our understanding of diseases of the aging brain, such as dementia. People with dementia can show changes in color preferences and other symptoms relating to the visual brain. "To interpret these correctly, we first need to gauge the effects of healthy aging on color perception. Further research is therefore needed to delineate the functional neuroanatomy of our findings, as higher cortical areas might also be involved."

Roman Wine Tasted 'Spicy', Archaeologists Reveal.
Archaeologists have revealed how Roman wine would have looked, smelled and tasted around 2,000 years ago. It is no secret that Ancient Romans loved their wine. Its consumption has been depicted in ancient texts as well as drawings and other archaeological finds. But the intricacies of its production have so far been a mystery. To discover more, researchers Dimitri Van Limbergen from Ghent University and Paulina Komar from the University of Warsaw compared ancient dolia—a type of vessel or vase used to hold wine back in Ancient Roman times—with similar containers used in modern-day winemaking. Dolia were utilized not just for holding the wine but for producing and aging it. Their findings, which are published in journal Antiquity, included that Roman wine likely tasted slightly spicy and had aromas similar toasted bread and walnuts. "The results of our study force us to question several long-held assumptions about Roman winemaking," Van Limbergen told Newsweek. "[Firstly], by using the techniques we describe in our paper, the Romans were able to make much better, more tasty and much more stable wines than is commonly assumed. "The widespread nature of wine cellars with earthenware containers (dolia) in the Roman world between the 3rd or 2nd century AD and the 3rd or 4th century AD suggests the development of a wine industry on a scale never attained before, and with a level of expertise and a sensory profile long obscured," Van Limbergen said. "Modern wine classification ideas are unhelpful to capture the nature of Roman wine. Wine colors, for example, were not standardly subdivided between white and red (as is done today), but for the Romans, they belonged to a wide spectrum of colors ranging from white and yellow to goldish, amber, brown and then red and black, all based on grapes macerated on the skin." According to the study, this is the first time the role of the vessels in Roman winemaking has been "scrutinized" meaning these are the first insights to ever come from such research. Nowadays, most wine is made in large metal containers, which allows more wine to be mass produced. But the dolia are comparable to qvevri, which are pots used to create wine in Georgia. The process used in this wine making process is very similar to how the Romans would have made their wine in dolia. According to the study, the narrow base of the fermentation vessel means solids from the grape are separated from the wine. Unlike a lot of the typical wines we consume, this fermentation process gave the liquid an orange color. The spicy flavor was created by burying the dolia into the ground, the study said. This meant that pH and temperature was well controlled while the wine aged. Yeasts had more of an opportunity to force, producing a compound known as sotolon. "Winemaking in qvevri and dolia is both extremely straightforward and an ingenious way of producing wine," Van Limbergen said. "Big wine cellars filled with dolia were investments of a kind that could only occur under economically favorable circumstances, and their presence attests to economic prosperity in the Roman world in Late Republican and Early Imperial times. "At the same time, many households could afford one dolium, and winemaking was probably part of daily life in many families, making wine a product consumed across a broad social scale (many households today in Georgia make their own wine and keep it next to the kitchen or in a cellar inside a qvevri, this must have been quite similar in the Roman world)." The texture of this wine would also have been different from the wine we consume today. The clay of the vessel gave the wine a "drying sensation" when in the mouth. According to the researchers, this was popular with Roman palates. Not only does this research teach us how the wine tasted and smelled, but it also gives archaeologists new details about how Romans lived. From the fermentation process, it is clear that the Romans knew many different techniques for creating wine and could vary how it tasted and smelled. They varied the tastes and smells by altering the shape of the dolia, and how they were stored.

Type 2 Diabetes Risk Lowered for Some by Drinking More Milk.
Drinking milk could reduce your risk of Type 2 diabetes if you lack the enzymes to break it down. Approximately 1 in 10 Americans has diabetes, 90 to 95 percent of whom have Type 2, according to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Type 2 diabetes occurs when your body's cells become resistant to the hormone insulin, which is important in controlling blood sugar levels. Type 2 diabetes is often preventable, with risk factors including being overweight, not getting enough exercise and genetics. Diet can also play an important role. In the past, the relationship between milk intake and Type 2 diabetes has been controversial. While some studies have shown a clear protective association, others have shown no correlation or even an increased risk of diabetes among milk drinkers. In a new study, published in the journal Nature Metabolism, researchers from across the U.S. have put this controversy to rest, highlighting a simple genetic variant that underpins these contrasting effects. In a study of over 12,000 Hispanic/Latino U.S. adults, the team, led by Qibin Qi of the Albert Einstein College of Medicine and Harvard Medical School, found that higher dietary milk intake was associated with a 30 percent decrease in diabetes risk, but only in individuals with a particular variant of one specific gene. The gene in question encodes the enzyme lactase, which is essential for the breakdown of milk sugars. Some people produce lactase throughout their lives. But others stop producing it after infancy, once they are weaned off their mother's milk. These individuals therefore struggle to digest milk sugars, which in many cases can result in lactose intolerance. But not always. "Lactase non-persistence does not necessarily preclude the ability to consume some amount of lactose," Lonneke Janssen Duijghuijsen, a researcher in nutrition and health at the Netherlands' Wageningen University, said in a statement. "Research has shown that many lactase nonpersistent individuals can still consume up to 12 grams of lactose per day, comparable to the amount in a large glass of milk, without suffering from intolerance symptoms," Duijghuijsen said. In these individuals, drinking milk was associated with a significant increase in the abundance of "good" gut bacteria, which in turn was correlated with a reduced risk of Type 2 diabetes. Milk intake was also associated with specific changes in blood metabolite levels in those who did not produce lactase into adulthood. The team confirmed these counterintuitive results by looking at a cohort of over 160,000 individuals from the UK Biobank—a large-scale biomedical database investigating the respective contributions of genetics and environment to the development of various diseases. This finding is further supported by previous research showing a strong negative association between milk intake and diabetes in East Asian individuals—a population with particularly low levels of lactase persistence in adulthood. "Our findings can help explain the previously observed population differences in the relationship between milk intake and risk of type 2 diabetes and also contribute to our understanding of the effect of milk intake on human metabolic health through the interplay of the host genetics, gut microbiota and circulating metabolites," the authors write. Regardless of these results, if a medical professional has warned you against drinking milk, you should follow this advice until more research is done in this area. "It is currently premature to draw conclusive relations to type 2 diabetes," Duijghuijsen said. "The publication suggests a statistical association without implying a causal relationship. The study proposes statistical associations between milk consumption, a specific metabolite, and type 2 diabetes incidence. However, these associations do not provide definitive evidence of causation, Duijghuijsen said. "The suggested links are indirect, leaving room for other influencing factors. Further research is imperative to delve deeper into these associations and determine their significance," she said.

Cats and Dogs Can Catch Your Winter Illnesses, Owners Warned.
We might be passing our illnesses to our pets more than we think, scientists have found. Pets that have close contact with their owners, including sharing a bed, snuggling and eating in the same areas as humans, are at risk of catching diseases from their owners. This is according to a new paper in the journal Zoonoses: Infections Affecting Humans and Animals. Diseases that pass between other species and humans are known as zoonoses, with over 60 percent of human pathogens being zoonotic in origin. Reverse zoonosis is when humans pass our diseases to animals. This discovery highlights that, while animals can pass their diseases to us, such as bird flu, swine flu and COVID-19, we can also infect them in return. "We're starting to see a lot of examples of reverse zoonosis. Pets are more susceptible than, maybe, we previously thought," paper author Benjamin Anderson, an assistant professor at the University of Florida's College of Public Health and Health Professions, said in a statement. In the paper, the authors describe how pets can catch several diseases from their human owners, ranging from swine flu, human norovirus, COVID-19 and tuberculosis to dengue, fungal infections and parasites. These were mostly seen between humans and dogs or cats, but a few were also reported between humans and horses, ferrets, and even parrots. Diseases are usually specific to certain species, as the pathogen will need to have certain structures to bind to and enter an animal's cells. "Typically, the viruses that I will have as a human are not going to fit into the receptors that a dog or cat has," Anderson said. However, sometimes a pathogen will mutate to have a structure that allows it to enter the cells of another species, enabling the disease to jump between the two species. Viruses like flu and COVID-19, among others, are prone to mutate frequently due to the fact that they contain RNA rather than DNA. RNA and DNA are checked for mutations by enzymes inside our cells, but the RNA checker enzyme is less accurate than the DNA proofreading enzyme. It means that RNA virus mutations are seen more frequently, and therefore RNA viruses can evolve to jump species at a faster rate. More closely-related species are more prone to having diseases jump between them, which is why zoonosis and reverse zoonosis often happen between mammals. However, sometimes the pathogen mutates enough to jump even that gap, spreading between mammals and birds, or even reptiles. The authors hope that this paper highlights the dangers of reverse zoonosis, and can help inform veterinarians as to the source of certain illnesses. "When you see a human in the clinic, you can ask questions like whether they were around any animals, or if any of their pets were sick. But when you get an animal that's sick, you may not always be able to get that kind of information to link it back to a human case," Anderson said. Reverse zoonosis can also endanger humans, as it provides another channel for diseases to spread, amplifying an epidemic. Pigs in particular could be infected by both human flu and bird flu, and therefore serve as a mixing pot for new viruses that could end up as a new pandemic, the study authors say. "While pathogens c ertainly can move from animals to other animals and can be picked up from the environment, exposure to humans also plays an important role. It's this constant back-and-forth exchange that happens over time, increasing the probability of a mutation taking place that allows the pathogen to infect a new host," Anderson said. Animals being involved in the spread of human diseases makes it more complicated to track infections, especially because animals don't often exhibit symptoms. The authors encourage people who are unwell, especially those with flu or COVID-19 infections, to avoid close contact with their pets. However, for those with a strong bond with their pet, or those with a service animal, this is not always possible. In this case, avoiding the pet coming into contact with any body fluids such as sneezes or snot is encouraged. "We have the diagnostic tools to track many different pathogens in both human and veterinary medicine, but not always the resources to see them used as broadly as is necessary to understand all of the epidemiological trends. In particular, we need greater testing among animals." Anderson said. "I think it's important to know not just about the human health issues, but also have a more complete picture as to what's actually happening out in the environment," Anderson said.

Winter Storm Brings Lake Michigan Rare Ice 'Sculptures'.
Awinter storm has created some rare ice "sculptures" along the shores of Lake Michigan. Drone videos from Timeless Aerial Photography show areas along the shores of the Great Lake, such as Grand Haven, South Haven, the St. Joseph Michigan Lighthouses in Michigan, and Michigan City in Indiana. Footage of well-known landmarks, such as the South Haven lighthouse and the St. Joseph lighthouse, were captured following an intense blizzard in the area. Icicles can be seen hanging from lighthouses and piers to the point where the structures are nearly covered in ice. As the footage zooms in on the frozen structures, parts of the water appear completely covered in snow. "The ice buildup is amazing right now," a photographer from Timeless Aerial Photography told Newsweek. The phenomenon is particularly strange considering that temperatures around Lake Michigan have been warmer than usual in recent days. However, when a snowstorm hit last week, it brought subzero temperatures to the region. In the footage, ice pancakes can be seen floating on the water. Michigan City received a whopping 35 inches of snow over the past weekend, according to Chicago TV station WLS, while other areas around the lake can expect the snow to continue this week. Usually, Lake Michigan does not freeze over completely, as it is a huge source of heat that is gradually released into the atmosphere. The lake is the second largest in the U.S., which means it is so large it can generate its own weather patterns. Its strong waves can work to prevent the formation of ice. However, it does freeze on occasion, and sometimes stunning ice formations can be seen. Lake Michigan is so large that it plays a huge role in influencing the climate and temperature in the surrounding cities. The lake's breeze cools the summer temperatures and can provide warmth during the winter. Cold air masses sweeping across the lake can increase snow or rainfall. Last week, moisture was seen evaporating off the surface of Lake Michigan and forming low-lying clouds. This caused much of the snow in the area. This is called lake-effect snow, which is when a mass of cold air moves over a warm lake, causing heat and moisture to rise. This moisture then turns cold, forming these clouds. Other Great Lakes have been affected by the recent freezing temperatures. Winter storms also hit Lake Erie. Huge boulders that are usually at the bottom of the lake were visible following an intense storm with 65-mile-per-hour winds that pushed back the lake waters, revealing the boulders.

Alzheimer's Test Less Invasive With New Technique.
Scientists have uncovered a new potential diagnostic tool for recognizing early Alzheimer's that offers a non-invasive, commercially viable technique for early disease detection in clinical settings. Alzheimer's affects roughly 5.8 million Americans, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The progressive disease is the most common form of dementia and is associated with memory loss and cognitive decline in regions of the brain involved in memory, thought and language. The disease is thought to be caused by the abnormal buildup of proteins in and around the cells in our brains, but exactly what triggers this process is still unclear. Today, there is no known cure for Alzheimer's disease. However, new medications may offer relief to patients and slow down the development of symptoms, particularly if it is diagnosed early. One of the most useful signs for detecting early Alzheimer's is a blood protein called phosphorylated tau, or "p-tau." "Previous work has demonstrated that high levels of this 'p-tau 217' in blood are found in people with Alzheimer's pathology in the brain," Tara Spires-Jones, president of the British Neuroscience Association and group leader at the UK Dementia Research Institute at the University of Edinburgh, Scotland, said in a statement. Today, levels of p-tau biomarkers are usually detected in cerebrospinal fluid—the watery liquid that surrounds and protects our brain and spinal cord. However, accessing this fluid requires a highly invasive procedure. But, according to a new study, led by researchers at the University of Gothenburg in Sweden and published in the journal JAMA Neurology, levels of p-tau 217 in the blood can be an equally reliable measure of the abnormal buildup of proteins in the brain. "These findings show that a blood test can accurately detect the presence of the proteins that build up in the brain to cause Alzheimer's disease," Charles Marshall, a professor of clinical neurology at Queen Mary University of London, said in a statement. What's more, this diagnostic technique is already commercially available. "The hope is that blood tests like this will improve access to a diagnosis in those seeking help for memory problems, and ultimately ensure that people can benefit from emerging treatments that can slow the progression of Alzheimer's disease," Marshall said. As more Alzheimer's drugs become available, these early diagnostics will become even more vital. "This is important because new drugs to treat Alzheimer's are coming to the market and already approved in the US, which work best in people in early stages of Alzheimer's," Spires-Jones said. "Blood tests that can help detect people in early stages of [the] disease will be very important for early diagnosis and use of the new treatments in future." "We will need further evidence to show that the blood test can accurately diagnose who is in the process of developing dementia, and that it can identify who is likely to benefit from treatments to slow down the disease," Marshall said. "We will also need to ensure that the blood test performs equally well in more diverse populations, so that it does not worsen existing health inequalities in access to diagnosis and treatment for dementia." Not everyone with these specific biomarkers will go on to develop dementia, Spires-Jones said. However, the test still offers a useful indicator of Alzheimer's-related risk factors that may support earlier disease detection in the future.

Russia–Ukraine War Leaves Scientists Struggling To Investigate Arctic Changes.
The study of how climate change has affected the Arctic is being hampered due to missing data resulting from the Russian invasion of Ukraine. Since the start of the conflict in February 2022, no data has been released from Russian stations in the Arctic, according to a new paper in the journal Nature Climate Change. "Our findings indicate a pre-existing gap in the knowledge used to track conditions in the Arctic and highlight that the ability to track and project Arctic change has further deteriorated as a result of the Russian attack on Ukraine," Efrén López-Blanco, study author and Arctic ecosystem ecology researcher at Aarhus University, told Newsweek. The eight countries with territory within the Arctic Circle include Norway, Sweden, Finland, Russia, the United States (Alaska), Canada, Denmark (Greenland), and Iceland, of which Russia is the largest. These countries comprise the Arctic Council, an intergovernmental forum designed to coordinate activities and research across the Arctic. The Arctic Council was paused after the invasion of Ukraine and has only recently resumed without the input of Russia. International scientists have, therefore, been missing data from the Russian section of the Arctic regarding annual average temperature, total rain, snow depth, soil moisture, vegetation, biomass and soil carbon—hampering a balanced analysis of climate change. "In our study, we benchmarked the Arctic representativeness of the largest high-latitude research station network, INTERACT network. INTERACT has 94 stations, of which 21 are in Russia. However, since we focused on latitudes above 59° N and excluded the Greenland Ice Sheet, we ended up using 60 INTERACT sites and 17 from Russia," López-Blanco said. This will make it more difficult to quantify the future of climate change across the region, the researchers explained. "While many of the key indicators of Arctic climate change and climate-induced responses can be estimated remotely, much of the understanding of Arctic change is based on in situ data measured on the ground at research stations," the authors wrote in the paper. "As ground-based observations that form the basis for assessments of the region's state will now come mainly from the non-Russian parts of the Arctic, the overall ability to monitor the status and trajectory of the Arctic biome may be severely limited over the foreseeable future." The study of how the Arctic Circle is changing is crucially important, as the region is warming at between two to four times the average global rate. The researchers estimate that the exclusion of Russian data has amplified a bias in climate forecasting in the Arctic across some ecosystem variables, one that was already present even when all Russian stations were included in the dataset. "In our study, we found that the INTERACT network, even accounting for the Russian research stations, has biases in representing key ecosystem conditions across the entire Arctic domain. For example, INTERACT stations are mainly located in slightly warmer and wetter Arctic regions with deeper snowpacks. These stations also have lower vegetation biomass and soil carbon," López-Blanco said. "Excluding Russian stations from INTERACT significantly increases biases in key ecosystem variables, therefore decreasing our ability to describe Arctic changes accurately. For example, the loss of Siberian research stations may be particularly detrimental for the ability to track global responses to climate change such as thawing permafrost, shifts in biodiversity, and carbon dynamics." The authors suggest that this bias may have originated out of the locations of the stations gathering the data, as some are situated in Arctic areas that are warmer and wetter, with low biomass and deeper snowpacks. And this bias only increases when the Russian stations—such as those in the taiga forests of Siberia—are removed from the data altogether. The researchers hope that their paper will highlight the importance of distributing research stations across the Arctic region, as well as how the Russian invasion of Ukraine has only widened our knowledge gap of how the Arctic is changing with the climate. "I think our approach can be used to further synthesize the state of knowledge quantifying potential biases and identify gaps to guide empirical studies," López-Blanco said. "For example, we could inform station managers about which variables and/or disciplines can be more ecologically relevant, other researchers about which variables should be measured in-situ or are particularly miss-represented, or policymakers to initiate well-informed management and conservation initiatives that would help mitigate some of the negative consequences and risks exposed by climate change."

Solar Storm to Hit Earth Today Causing GPS and Radio Disruption.
Ageomagnetic storm is expected to surge across the Earth's atmosphere later today as a plume of solar plasma hits our planet. This chunk of the sun was spat out on Sunday as a magnetic filament erupted from the star's surface, with the coronal mass ejection (CME) set to collide with the Earth at around 1 p.m. ET, according to models by both NASA and NOAA. The CME collision could lead to geomagnetic storms as intense as G2-class or even G3-class, which may trigger GPS issues, satellite problems, and auroras seen much further south than usual. "Direct Hit! An impressive #solarstorm launch in the Earth-strike zone means a new chance for #aurora by midday Jan 22. We could see a G2-G3 with this one if the magnetic field of the storm is oriented correctly. Amateur radio & #GPS users, expect disruptions on Earth's nightside," space weather physicist Tamitha Skov posted on X, formerly Twitter, on Sunday. CMEs are triggered by magnetic activity on the sun's surface flinging out huge volumes of solar plasma. This cloud, if aimed toward the Earth, approaches our planet in around 48 to 72 hours, though some can arrive much sooner. When the plume collides with the Earth's magnetic field, it can cause disturbances that trigger a geomagnetic storm. Geomagnetic storms are measured on a scale of their strength, from G1 (minor) to G5 (extreme), according to NOAA. The strength of the storm depends on the power of the CME that triggers it, with more powerful storms being rarer: per 11-year solar cycle, the Earth can expect around 1700 G1 storms, but only about 100 G4 storms and a mere 4 G5 storms during that same period. The upcoming solar storm is expected to be G2, with a chance of G3, which can result in several strange impacts across Earth. Power grids may experience voltage problems, radio wave transmissions can be scrambled, and satellites orbiting close to the Earth may see increased drag, requiring orbit adjustments. "Whilst these storms cannot harm us or nature directly, they are disruptive and potentially very damaging to technology," Huw Morgan, head of the Solar Physics group at Aberystwyth University in the United Kingdom, told Newsweek. "Electric currents are induced in Earth's crust, and this can cause surges and damage to power grids. Communications can be disrupted, and GPS navigation. Air flights at high latitudes are prone to radiation doses, requiring cancellation or rerouting. And there's a danger to satellites and astronauts." More powerful geomagnetic storms can also cause auroras to be seen further and further south from the North Pole: G3 storms may result in the Northern Lights being visible from Illinois and Oregon, while G5 storms can lead to the aurora being spotted as far south as Florida and southern Texas. This is because the plasma reacts with charged particles in the Earth's atmosphere, causing them to react with gases like nitrogen and oxygen and making them glow. "The magnetic disruption penetrates further into Earth's magnetosphere, and a larger amount of space plasma is injected into Earth's system, and this can also reach lower latitudes," Morgan said. "This energetic plasma interacts with molecules in Earth's atmosphere, causing the lights. In a very large storm in 1859 (the Carrington event), the lights were seen at the equator and were very bright."

Whale Calves Caught Suckling Other Mothers To Steal Milk.
Whale calves have been caught stealing milk from other mothers, new research from the University of Western Australia has found. The new study, published in Mammalian Biology, found that southern right whale calves sometimes "allosuckle," meaning they steal milk from whales that are not their own mothers. "Allosuckling has been observed in seals and land mammals, including deer, reindeer and giraffe, but not quantified in large whales," adjunct research fellow Kate Sprogis, from UWA's Oceans Institute and School of Biological Sciences, said in a summary of the findings. "The behavior observed off the south coast of Australia appeared to be a direct and intentional movement from the calf and the non-biological lactating mother was generally evasive." This species of whale lives throughout the Southern Hemisphere, migrating between feeding grounds with the turn of the seasons, according to NOAA. The species' life span is "likely similar" to that of the North Pacific and North Atlantic right whales—similar species found in the Northern Hemisphere that are thought to live for at least 70 years, NOAA says. Females give birth every three to five years, and have a one-year gestation period. The calves then tend to stay with their mothers for a year after birth. It is easy to understand why allosuckling happens—this can provide a calf with extra milk and nourishment. However, it actually has negative effects on the biological mother as whales need to provide milk to their own offspring. "[She] is not able to replenish her lost energy reserves," Sprogis said. "And at the end of the nursing season the lactating mothers need to migrate back to their feeding grounds. For southern right whales, this is a long migration from Australia all the way to sub-Antarctic Islands or to Antarctica where the mothers can refuel their energy by feeding on small invertebrates like copepods and krill." These findings are important as southern right whales are endangered under the Australian Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act. Learning how they grow as calves is essential in contributing to conservation efforts. It is likely that this behavior occurs in other whale species, but more research will be needed to determine this. There are a number of threats facing the species, meaning their numbers are not as abundant as they once were. Until the 1960s, the species were hunted by the whaling industry which drastically depleted their numbers. Since then, the population has recovered only slightly. Other threats include entanglement in fishing gear. If the species gets tangled in nets or rope, it can impair their ability to swim and feed. They are also at risk from vessel strikes, habitat degradation and climate change.

Maya Funeral Urn Depicting Corn God Unearthed by Archaeologists.
Archaeologists have unearthed an ancient Maya funeral urn featuring a depiction of a pre-Hispanic corn deity. The artifact was uncovered during archaeological rescue investigations carried out by Mexico's National Institute of Anthropology and History (INAH) amid works for Section 7 of the Tren Maya (Maya Train) project. This involves the building of an almost 1,000-mile-long railway that traverses Mexico's Yucatán Peninsula—the heart of the ancient Maya civilization—which is rich in antiquities. Tren Maya is one of the largest and most controversial infrastructure projects in the history of Mexico. It aims to connect the region's popular beach resorts to lesser-known inland locations—including historic Maya sites—that represent some of the poorest parts of southern Mexico. While thousands of ancient Maya artifacts and structures have been uncovered during work on the project, critics have raised concerns about damage and destruction to archaeological remains, as well as the local environment. Sections 1 to 4 of the Maya Train opened in December 2023, while sections 5 to 7 are scheduled to open in February 2024. Section 7, along which the Maya funeral urn was found, connects the stations of Chetumal Airport and Escárcega. The artifact, which is made of clay, contains the remains of an individual. The urn features an anthropomorphic figure that appears to depict a pre-Hispanic god of corn in his representation as a growing cob. The INAH experts say that similar images of this Maya deity have been documented in figurines from the Mexican island of Jaina, which lies just off the coast of the state of Campeche in the Yucatán. The urn also contains features that appear to represent a Maya symbol associated with the wind and the divine breath. In addition, the lid of the urn contains a representation of an owl—a bird that had symbolic meaning in the ancient Maya world. The owl was considered a creature of omen and a symbol of war during the Classic period, around A.D. 250 to A.D. 900 of Mesoamerican history, as recorded by similar vessels. The urn corresponds with the "Paaktzatz" style of vessels, which were made between A.D. 680 and A.D. 770 in the area of Río Bec—a Maya archaeological site located in the southern portion of Campeche state. The urn was found alongside another vessel that also features a representation of an owl, leading archaeologists to believe that they were part of an offering associated with a pre-Hispanic construction.

Ancient Maya Elite Ate Freshwater Crab to Celebrate Special Occasions.
Archaeologists have uncovered the remains of food eaten by ancient Maya elites during special ritual banquets. Researchers from Mexico's National Institute of Anthropology and History (INAH) have identified more than 1,300 freshwater crab remains found in ritual deposits at the Palace of Palenque, a renowned Maya archaeological site in the southern state of Chiapas. The palace is the largest architectural complex in the ancient city, which was occupied for centuries, reaching its zenith between A.D. 500 and A.D. 700, when its influence extended throughout the surrounding region, according to UNESCO. The archaeological site contains some of the finest architecture, sculptures and carvings that have survived from the ancient Maya civilization. The Maya civilization dominated what is now southeastern Mexico, Guatemala, Belize and the western areas of El Salvador and Honduras for more than 3,000 years until the era of Spanish colonization. The ancient Maya were notable for their striking architecture and art; advanced calendar, mathematics and astronomical system; and for creating the only fully developed writing system in pre-Hispanic America. The ruling and priestly elites of ancient Palenque used to enjoy endemic freshwater crabs, which they consumed as a delicacy in private ceremonies that commemorated special events, such as certain milestones in the palace's construction. These crabs were considered to be a symbolic marker of regeneration. They were therefore consumed in ceremonies that marked the inauguration or closing of certain spaces and constructions within the palace complex at the city's height, according to INAH archaeologists. "The symbolic significance of crabs in the ancient Maya world is a captivating topic. While there are no explicit references in surviving ancient texts, we can glean insights from the enduring monuments, ceramics, and legends," Fernando Moreira, a researcher who has studied the role of crabs in the ancient Maya world but was not involved in the latest findings, told Newsweek. "Turning to Mesoamerican mythology, there's a widespread origin myth for corn involving a storm god who creates a cleft in a mountain using lighting, releasing corn to the world. Crabs feature prominently in various Mesoamerican tales, intertwining themes of creation and regeneration, often linked to the lunar cycle and the feminine," he said. While the primary exploitation of crabs by the Maya seems to have been for culinary purposes, there is substantial evidence pointing towards their use in ritualistic contexts and as materials for decorative or symbolic items, according to Moreira. The latest findings at Palenque have shed new light on the rituals that took place at the ancient city's Palace hundreds of years ago. INAH researcher Carlos Varela Scherrer, who was involved in the investigations that uncovered the crab remains, said some modern-day Maya communities in northern Chiapas prepare large quantities of food on the eve of certain festive days. Afterward, they pour the remains of the food into excavated holes as an offering to the deities—as would have occurred in pre-Hispanic times. "For the ancient Maya, it was important to hold ritual banquets where food was shared between the participants and the deities. Therefore, the recovery of crabs in Palenque opens new interpretations about the use of fauna and its cuisine," Scherrer said in a press release. The researcher specializes in studying the remains of animals found in these kinds of deposits. The discovery of crab parts stands out because of the fragility of their remains, which are rarely recovered in archaeological contexts in the Maya Lowlands. Two ritual deposits were uncovered during the recent research. As part of the latter, the researchers found an anthropomorphic stucco head with the probable representation of an ancient ruler of Palenque, a ceramic vessel depicting a Maya deity and a pipe in the shape of a river prawn, alongside the crab remains. "In general terms," Scherrer said, "we were able to appreciate that these deposits are the product of events that were characterized by the consumption and burning of food and other objects, which were placed over cavities excavated in the floors and quickly covered again, enabling the exceptional conservation of archaeological material." The latest discovery sheds new light on the religious significance of crabs in the culture of the Lowland Maya, particularly in how these animals were used to commemorate events at various locations within the Palace, Moreira said. "What excites me most, however, is the potential for future research in non-elite areas. Questions like whether commoners consumed crabs or used them in rituals are intriguing and could reveal significant contrasts between elite ideologies and broader societal practices. The prospect of uncovering more about this aspect of Maya life is truly fascinating." Lisa Johnson, a researcher with the Department of Anthropology at the University of Nevada, Las Vegas, told Newsweek we still do not know much about the non-elite population of Palenque. As a result, it is difficult to say whether or not crab was solely a delicacy consumed by the elites. "Crab is not hard to find, they still run around the site and were walking into my excavation! So it would not have been hard to get," said Johnson, who was also not involved in the latest INAH research but has been investigating life in the homes of ancient Maya people who lived within sight of the Palace of Palenque. "However, in other feasting contexts outside of the palace, crab was not a major element of the faunal remains left behind. We do find some crab, but the quantity and concentration that was found in the palace is unique. This may suggest a 'palace diet'—but it may also suggest there were particular types of meals for certain events." What is "exciting" about the latest findings is the similarity in feasting practices across the city, according to Johnson. "Certainly, the palace had the means to host much more elaborate feasts than the well-to-do Palencanos that my colleagues and I study, but it does reveal just how important feasting was for Maya society," she said. "To host a feast brings prestige to the host and fulfills the Maya principle of reciprocity. Archaeologists have long understood that feasting is about so much more than eating. It is a social and ritual affair. It has elements of performance and for the rulers of Palenque would have been opportunities to exercise their status and power."

Haitian-Americans Say Biden Is Turning His Back on a Country He Promised to Help
FEBRUARY 1, 2022 7:00 AM EST
It takes a lot to faze Marleine Bastien. After growing up under the brutal dictatorship of François “Papa Doc” Duvalier, she left Port-au-Prince for Miami in 1981. The 62-year-old thought she had seen it all in her four decades working with the city’s Haitian community as a social worker and paralegal—until now.

Every day, the situation Bastien faces in the yellow stucco building that houses her advocacy organization in Miami’s Little Haiti neighborhood feels like a new low. “It’s like the community is suffering from a collective trauma, to the point where at our center, we have members coming in and telling us, ‘I cannot sleep, I cannot stand even watching the news,’” she says. Before Christmas, families already struggling under the financial strains of the pandemic told her they were now having to set aside money in case family members in Haiti were kidnapped and needed to pay ransom. “I never heard that before,” she says.

The Haitian-American diaspora is used to unsettling news from the island. But in the past six months, Haiti has not only gone through the assassination of a sitting president, a constitutional crisis, and repeated attempts on the acting prime minister’s life, but also a devastating earthquake that killed thousands, followed by a tropical storm and prolonged fuel crises. Powerful gangs have stepped into the void; they now control more than half of the nation, by some estimates. They fund themselves by taking both prominent and ordinary citizens hostage for exorbitant sums, including a recent group of American missionaries. The country now has the highest kidnapping rate in the world.

Haitian-Americans have been watching these horrors play out on the screens of their phones, connected by WhatsApp and social media but helpless in the face of daily pleas for help from friends and family. “There’s the constant pressure from family members who are scared to death, calling people here asking for help,” says Bastien. “And you just feel trapped.”

President Joe Biden was a vocal critic of former President Donald Trump’s Haiti policies. While courting the Haitian-American vote in Miami during his 2020 campaign, he accused Trump of “abandoning the Haitian people while the country’s political crisis is paralyzing that nation.” But critics here and in Washington alike say so far, Biden has done little different. His administration has continued to employ a Trump-era public health law that uses the coronavirus pandemic as a justification to deport Haitians back to a country many call a war zone.

After the assassination of President Jovenel Moïse last July, initiatives to transition the country to a new government have stalled amid a fierce power struggle, aggravated by the pervasive gang violence. Haitian groups and international observers say the ongoing deportations are only adding to the instability and violence. So far more than 17,000 Haitians have been deported under Biden, straining limited resources amid food insecurity, a health care system “on the brink of collapse” in a country with the third lowest COVID-19 vaccination rate in the world, and a collapsed economy, according to a December letter signed by Amnesty International and seven other human rights groups protesting the deportations.

Read More: Caught Between U.S. Policies and Instability at Home, Haitian Migrants in Tijuana Are in a State of Limbo

Haitian-American activists and community leaders in Miami say they are frustrated with the apparent ambivalence toward the worsening crisis from leaders in both Tallahassee and Washington. They say they are tired of empty expressions of support from U.S. officials and exhortations about the need for “democratic elections” instead of concrete actions, like stemming the illegal flow of weapons from the U.S. that are arming the gangs, or changing longtime discriminatory immigration policies towards Haitians.

“If it were any other nation, Haiti would be on the news daily, when you consider a country where in many places children are not going to school, stores are closed, businesses close up every day, the streets are empty,” Bastien says. “This is a country under siege, yet you don’t read about it daily in the newspaper. And it’s right here. It’s 90 minutes from here.”

The leader of the "Pitit Desalin" party, Moise Jean Charles, rides a horse as Haitian protesters march through the streets to denounce the upsurge in kidnappings committed by gangs in Port-au-Prince, Haiti, on February 28, 2021. (Reginald Louissaint—AFP/Getty Images)
The leader of the "Pitit Desalin" party, Moise Jean Charles, rides a horse as Haitian protesters march through the streets to denounce the upsurge in kidnappings committed by gangs in Port-au-Prince, Haiti, on February 28, 2021. Reginald Louissaint—AFP/Getty Images
On July 7, world leaders reacted with shock when President Moïse was assassinated in the bedroom of his private residence by Colombian mercenaries.

“We are…saddened to hear of the horrific assassination of President Jovenel Moïse,” Biden said in a statement condemning the “heinous” act. “The United States offers condolences to the people of Haiti, and we stand ready to assist as we continue to work for a safe and secure Haiti.” Two weeks later, Biden dispatched a presidential delegation to pay its respects at Moïse’s funeral in the city of Cap-Haïtien, and meet with Haitian officials behind the scenes to figure out what would come next. The delegation included the newly announced U.S. special envoy to the country, Daniel Foote.

Read More: 25 Years After ‘Operation Uphold Democracy,’ Oft-Forgotten U.S. Military Intervention Still Shapes Life in Haiti

A veteran career diplomat who had previously served as Deputy Chief of Mission in Haiti, Foote had been tasked with “facilitating long-term peace and stability and to support efforts to hold free and fair presidential and legislative elections,” State Department spokesman Ned Price announced on July 22. But he soon found himself in an impossible situation, he said in a recent interview with TIME. The U.S. had long ignored warnings that the political and security situation was unraveling under Moïse, who had been ruling by decree for a year by the time he was assassinated. Now, the Biden administration was pushing for democratic elections to take place later that year amid a rapidly deteriorating security situation. Haitian civil society organizations and international groups warned that rushing an election in that environment would be unrealistic, dangerous and ultimately ineffective.

“We don’t pay attention to the real conditions on the ground because don’t have a cadre of Haiti experts, and instead we keep backing and anointing people who we think serve our interests,” says Foote, who was in Haiti in the aftermath of the 2010 earthquake that killed hundreds of thousands and says he still has nightmares about it. “[The U.S.] doesn’t seem to really care about Haiti until there’s a humanitarian disaster on an unprecedented scale, but we’re looking at a slow motion one developing right in front of our very eyes.”

The U.S. has backed the interim government set up by Prime Minister Ariel Henry, who took over after Moïse’s assassination and has since postponed elections indefinitely and reportedly been linked to the main suspect in the plot. Foote thought Washington’s support was a mistake, reflective of previous U.S. foreign policy failures in the country propping up members of Haiti’s political elite they see as aligned with U.S. interests. “It was so clear that that guy has no mandate and Haiti has no future under him,” he says.

More from TIME
As this political crisis was unfolding, thousands of Haitian migrants, many of them families with children, had been congregating at the U.S.-Mexico border. Some had made their way all the way from Chile and Brazil, where they had been since the 2010 earthquake. Earlier in 2021, the Biden Administration had allowed an increasing number of Haitian asylum seekers to enter the country. During the first seven months of his presidency, 92% of Haitian migrants — more than 24,700 people — had their asylum claims processed. In August, the Biden Administration had also extended temporary protected status to some undocumented Haitians living in the U.S.

These inconsistently applied border policies fueled rumors that spread quickly through word of mouth, messaging apps and social media. By September, with more than 14,000 Haitians camped under a bridge in Del Rio, Texas, waiting to file their asylum claims, the Biden Administration decided to crack down to deter more Haitians from coming, launching an expulsion campaign. U.S. authorities used Title 42—a public health policy implemented by Trump, purportedly to stop the spread of COVID-19—to launch a large-scale deportation of Haitians from the U.S. before they could file asylum claims. In images widely broadcast around the world, U.S. border agents on horseback were shown herding Haitian migrants like cattle. These actions were condemned by legal experts and advocates who say the Biden Administration’s continued use of Title 42 violates both U.S. and international asylum law.

For Haitian-Americans, who had largely supported Biden when he ran on the promise of repealing Trump’s immigration policies, it felt like a betrayal. “That’s a hell of a ramp up,” says Nana Gyamfi, the Executive Director of Black Alliance for Just Immigration, a national advocacy group based in New York. “Joe Biden got down on his knees in (Miami’s) Little Haiti, and made promises about protecting people—not separating their families, not expelling them to a country that has been designated as too dangerous to deport people to. Every single one of those promises was broken,” she says. “This Administration has actually made the situation worse.”

Officials within the Biden Administration were divided on whether it was ethical to deport people back to dangerous, even deadly, circumstances. Foote, the envoy in Haiti, was firmly in the camp that it was not, but he felt he was not being listened to in Washington. On Sept. 22, two months after being appointed, Foote decided the best way to send a clear message would be to resign in protest of the “inhumane, counterproductive decision to deport thousands of Haitian refugees.”

The Haitian government had just collapsed and could not provide for the basic needs or security of its people, he wrote in his resignation letter. The forced deportation of refugees would only “fuel further desperation and crime,” in turn triggering more migration to the U.S. (The State Department at the time refuted Foote’s characterization that his recommendations had been ignored, saying all proposals “were fully considered in a rigorous and transparent policy process.”)

Soon after his resignation, the cycle Foote described became visible in Florida. In November, a wooden sailboat carrying 63 Haitian migrants reached the Florida Keys, the first time in more than two years that such a large group made it around U.S. coast patrols. They told U.S. Customs and Border Protection officials they had spent more than three weeks at sea. Since then, more boats have made their way through the Florida Straits, including an overloaded, rickety vessel that landed in the Florida Keys in early January carrying 176 men, women and children.

Marleine Bastien, Executive Director of the Family Action Network Movement (FAMM), speaks in Miami following the news that Haitian President Jovenel Moïse was assassinated on July 7, 2021. (Lynne Sladky—AP)
Marleine Bastien, Executive Director of the Family Action Network Movement (FAMM), speaks in Miami following the news that Haitian President Jovenel Moïse was assassinated on July 7, 2021. Lynne Sladky—AP
On Jan. 21, the latest high-level international meeting to determine Haiti’s future, this time hosted by Canada, ended with renewed calls for the dueling political factions — led by Henry and his political allies on one side, and a diverse coalition of civil society and political groups on the other — to reach a consensus. “We need the Haitian people to come together around a way forward, and the international community is focused on supporting that effort but not supplanting it,” a senior State Department official told reporters on a Jan. 21 press call after the meeting.

The summit came as Haitian and international observers warn there could be further violence on Feb. 7. That’s the date when the term of Moïse would have officially ended — and so should Henry’s interim term. But Henry has hit back against challenges to his legitimacy, declaring “there will not be a new president on February 7.”

“American, Canadian and French ambassadors [are] are all concerned about the potential for instability as we approach the February 7 date,” Russel Honore, a retired U.S. Army General who led the summit, told reporters after the conclave.

There is now broad agreement among both Haitian and international officials that holding elections will be impossible without a plan in place to handle the volatile security situation. “There needs to be adequate security for candidates to campaign, for parties to hold rallies, to have the provisional electoral council carry out their duties, and for voters to be able to safely go forth and cast their ballots,” a senior Administration official told reporters on a conference call after a virtual meeting with officials from Canada and Haiti.

Multiple proposals for transitional governments have been floated in recent months, including one championed by a coalition of civil society and prominent Haitian lawmakers to put in place a two-year transition known as the “Montana Accord.” It would include an interim president and prime minister elected by a 44-member transitional council that would work on a plan to rebuild government institutions. Henry has opposed it, pushing for his own deal which would keep him in power, despite the vacant presidency, until the next elections can be held. “Before the summer, Haiti will have a new Constitution…that allows us to hold elections,” he said on Jan. 25.

In the midst of all these roadblocks, it’s important to challenge the sense of fatalism that permeates every aspect of U.S. policy towards Haiti, says Dr. Marie Guerda Nicolas, a Haitian-American psychology professor at the University of Miami. This feeling only justifies the scant attention and political will focused on figuring out a way forward, says Nicolas, who has spent time in recent months in rural communities who took matters into their own hands to rebuild after the earthquake knowing there would be little help from the government in Port-au-Prince.

“When we talk about the whole entire country as if it’s hopeless and helpless, then it diminishes the work that these people are doing,” she says. “They wouldn’t work this hard if they didn’t believe that a new Haiti was possible. Yes, there are lots of challenges there, but at the same time, there’s a lot of capability and resilience.”

In Miami, a lot of the anger and frustration is being directed squarely at the Biden administration. Bastien’s center has struggled to keep up with the demand for mental health resources and case workers as the situation on the island has deteriorated further. Some clients have become more desperate and aggressive, leading the organization to look into hiring security guards for the first time in its 30-year history.

“What’s going on in Haiti is partly a result of bad U.S. foreign policies, of decades of supporting incompetent and corrupt leaders, and the U.S. is still contributing to creating worse conditions right now,” says Bastien. In meetings with State Department officials and U.S. Homeland Security Secretary Alejandro Mayorkas, she and other Haitian community leaders have emphasized the need for concrete commitments to quell the flow of U.S. arms and halt the deportations.

But with few results, she and other Haitian-American activists say some members of the community have gone as far as changing their voter registration from Democrat to independent. “I’ve never seen young Haitian-Americans so alert and engaged,” she says. “They see the truth: the most powerful nation in the world is not only taking very little action, but making things worse.”
Sanctions Won't Hurt Myanmar's Brutal Leaders, Activists Say. Here's What Could
FEBRUARY 1, 2022 7:22 AM EST
The U.S. imposed new sanctions on senior leaders of Myanmar’s military junta on Monday—the eve of the one-year anniversary of their overthrow of the country’s democratically elected government and imprisonment of its leader, Aung San Suu Kyi.

The U.S., joined by the U.K., and Canada, announced sanctions on officials who helped prosecute Aung San Suu Kyi, the head of the National League for Democracy. The Nobel Peace Prize laureate was arrested in the Feb. 1, 2021 coup. Myanmar courts have sentenced her to a total of six years in prison as of Jan. 10—but she faces additional charges.

Washington also slapped penalties on the scion of the Kyaw Thaung family, who the New York Times reported has strong ties to the Myanmar military and helped it procure equipment. The sanctions also targeted a Myanmar government agency responsible for procuring arms for the military, which is known locally as the Tatmadaw.

But activists and Myanmar watchers say that the targeted sanctions will do little to deter a brutal regime that is increasingly isolated from the West and determined to put down resistance to its rule with violent repression. More than 1,500 people have been killed in encounters with the junta across the country, according to human rights group Assistance Association of Political Prisoners.

“I think it’s fair to say that the West has had little leverage in Myanmar both politically and on the ground since the coup,” says John Nielsen, Senior Analyst at Danish Institute for International Studies and former Danish Ambassador to Myanmar.

Pro-democracy protesters have long called on the international community to find ways to cut off the junta’s revenue streams. And since last year’s coup, several Western firms—including energy giants TotalEnergies of France and Chevron of the U.S.—have vowed to pull business out of Myanmar due to human rights abuses in the country.

Read more: Myanmar’s Artists Are Continuing to Resist from Abroad

Junta leader Min Aung Hlaing and other members of the Tatmadaw were already under sanction by the U.S. and other nations. Human Rights Watch has urged the United Nations Security Council to impose a legally-binding global arms embargo on Myanmar.

But in addition to punitive measures, Burmese exiles say the international community must work to protect people suffering under the junta’s rule. London-based Burmese activist and scholar Maung Zarni says neighboring states should open their borders to Burmese refugees who flee from the Tatmadaw.

They are also wary of dialogue with the military leaders, which neighboring countries including some members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), favor. Nay San Lwin, a co-founder of the Free Rohingya Coalition, a global network of Rohingya activists and allies, says many Burmese protesters feel such talks will only serve to cement the coup-leaders’ legitimacy.

Read more: ‘Risking Everything.’ Myanmar Activist Talks About Her Fight

But not everyone is shunning the Tatmadaw. Russia has been criticized for warming up to Myanmar post-coup, continuing to sell arms and its officials attending junta-led events. China also has ongoing dealings with Myanmar, but has taken a more ambivalent stance: It urged ”to restart the democratic process” in the Southeast Asian country while engaging with both the Tatmadaw and ethnic armed forces. “China’s primary objectives in Myanmar is to ensure stability at the borders and get access to the Indian Ocean through an economic corridor from Kunming to Rakhine. They will work with any party in the conflict to accomplish these objectives—and that is in essence what they are doing,” Nielsen says.

Jason Tower, Director for Myanmar at the United States Institute of Peace, says there must be a regional approach to the crisis, as companies closely aligned with the junta operate in neighboring states. If the U.S. and allies can convince Myanmar’s neighbors, including Thailand and India, to crack down on these firms, it could have a dramatic effect on the cash flowing to military leaders.

But the window for such action may be closing. Cambodia has taken over chairmanship of ASEAN in 2022. And Cambodian Prime Minister Hun Sen—no friend of democracy—has given a conditional invitation the Myanmar coup leader. Last year, the nine countries barred the Myanmar junta’s representative from attending its meetings.

Increasingly many activists say they cannot rely on the international community to support their cause of restoring a democratic government in Myanmar. They are putting their faith in ethnic minority militias that have long fought the Tatmadaw, and the People’s Defense Force—an armed group composed of members of Myanmar’s exiled shadow government and pro-democracy protesters. “If we want to be free, we have to fight for ourselves,” says Zarni.
U.S. Bobsledder Tests Positive for COVID-19 at Beijing Olympics
FEBRUARY 1, 2022 9:59 AM EST
The first U.S. Olympic athlete to reveal a positive COVID-19 test in Beijing is bobsledder Elana Meyers Taylor.

The 37-year-old, who has medaled in the last three winter Games, traveled to the Chinese capital with her son Nico and husband Nic Taylor, who is an alternate on the men’s bobsled team. All three tested positive, she told USA Today. Meyers Taylor said she is asymptomatic, and quarantining alone.

“Getting to the Olympics is never easy, and this time, as a new mom, it has been the most challenging,” said Meyers Taylor in a statement on Twitter. “But also, incredibly rewarding, to be able to show that it can still be done.”

After arriving to Beijing on January 27, on January 29 I tested positive for Covid-19. I am asymptomatic and currently at an isolation hotel- and yes I am completely isolated. Getting to the Olympics is never easy, and this time, as a new mom, it has been the most challenging,

— Elana Meyers Taylor OLY (@eamslider24) February 1, 2022
USA Today reporter Nancy Armour tweeted that Meyers Taylor is still nursing, and said she praised both U.S. Olympic officials and the quarantine hotel for getting her a breast pump and helping to transport breast milk to Nico. Meyers Taylor retweeted the message.

“I don’t get to be with my son, which is probably [the] hardest part of all of it,” she told USA Today.

Challenging for any athlete who tests positive but I believe @eamslider24 is @TeamUSA’s only mom with a child here. She praised the US Olympic and Paralympic Committee and quarantine hotel for getting her a pump and getting her breast milk to Nico, because she’s still nursing. https://t.co/WujWQ5QMpV

— Nancy Armour (@nrarmour) February 1, 2022
Meyes Taylor arrived in Beijing Jan. 27 and tested positive two days later. “This is just the latest obstacle that my family and I have faced on this journey, so I’m remaining optimistic that I’ll be able to recover quickly and still have the opportunity to compete,” she tweeted.

The women’s monobob event takes place Feb. 13-14 and the two-woman bobsled event is scheduled for Feb 18-19. She’ll need two negative PCR tests 24 hours apart before being cleared from isolation. However, she’ll likely miss out on the chance to train on the track ahead of the Opening Ceremony on Friday. The U.S. Olympic Committee has provided her with a weight plate and suspension bands to help her train in isolation.

Meyers Taylor and her family travelled to Beijing directly from Switzerland, where she competed at the World Cup event Jan. 16. The athlete, who has received both shots of the COVID-19 vaccine and a booster, hasn’t been back to the U.S. since Nov. 10 as she wanted to reduce the risk of catching the virus, she told the newspaper.

More from TIME
She won the silver medal in the two-woman bobsled at the 2014 and 2018 Winter games, and bronze in 2010. She is ranked world No. 1 in both that event and the women’s monobob, which will feature for the first time at the Winter Olympics this year.

Meyers Taylor is not the first Team USA athlete to test positive in the run up to the Games. Josh Williamson, another U.S. bobsledder, revealed in an Instagram post that he tested positive for COVID-19 Jan. 23 before flying out. Williamson said he will take a later flight to the games when he tests negative. A third bobsledder has also tested positive, however, U.S. officials say they hope all three will be able to compete.

China has pledged to put on “simple, safe and splendid” games. Hosted more than two years after the first known outbreak of COVID-19 in Wuhan, the Winter Olympics operate on a “closed loop” system” in which Olympic athletes, officials and media do not come into contact with the general population of China. The system employs daily tests, health-monitoring apps, and special travel lanes.

Many national Olympic committees, including Team USA, have enforced vaccine requirements on athletes and staff.

Yet, breakthrough infections have pushed the total number of positive cases at the games to 200, including 67 among athletes and team officials. More than 466,000 COVID-19 tests have already been administered to athletes and others associated with the Games in Beijing.

China has pursued a zero-COVID policy since the pandemic began, enforcing strict city-wide lockdowns over handfuls of cases. In the run up to the Lunar New Year, citizens in the western city of Xi’an and in the northwestern province of Henan were told to stay at home.

Apart from battling the complications of COVID-19, this year’s Winter games have been tarnished by a diplomatic boycott led by the U.S. over what Washington says are China’s “crimes against humanity in Xinjiang, and other human rights abuses.” Beijing denies the allegations.
Meet the 'Chief Chocolate Officer' Behind Dubai's Favorite Sweet Treats
BY NICOLA CHILTON
FEBRUARY 1, 2022 3:02 PM EST
Kathy Johnston is so in love with chocolate, she lies awake at night thinking about it. “For as long as I can remember, I have been obsessed,” she says. But as chief chocolate officer of Dubai-based chocolatier Mirzam, that’s a healthy fixation to have.

Like many other goods on Dubai’s store shelves, most of the city’s chocolate has traditionally been imported. But Mirzam is one of several ambitious startups developing homegrown alternatives—in its case, it’s making high-quality, bean-to-bar chocolate featuring ingredients sourced from along a historic spice route that ran from the west coast of Japan across the Middle East to Europe. Johnston joined Mirzam in early 2016 after meeting the company’s founders, who convinced her to work for them, rather than chasing her original dream of moving to Switzerland, chocolate capital of the world.

At first, the company’s plan was to primarily export its offerings to the U.S. while slowly building a market in the United Arab Emirates. But locals quickly embraced the company’s unique chocolates, which are known for their Emirati flavors and spices such as cardamon, almonds and pistachios. (That Mirzam collaborates with local artists for its branding and packaging further bolsters its hometown cred.) Nearly as soon as Mirzam’s team opened their doors for tastings, the company sold out of all of its stock—a sign as strong as any that Dubai was a more promising market than the team first thought. “We didn’t anticipate such a strong response locally,” Johnston says. “We had no time to think about export.”

Born in New Zealand, Johnston moved to Dubai when she was three years old. Her love of all things chocolate goes all the way back to her childhood, when she’d build ladders out of kitchen chairs to get at her mother’s hidden chocolate stash and spend her pocket money on imported praline eggs and salted caramel bars. She recalls telling her grandfather, who was the lead mechanic on Sir Edmund Hillary’s 1958 South Pole expedition, that her dream was to have her own chocolate factory.

That dream has come true at Mirzam, where Johnston oversees everything from sourcing (she works with small producers around the world) to production, packaging, and sales. But her true passion is coming up with innovative new sweets, with a focus on incorporating traditional Emirati recipes into the company’s offerings, including its popular crepe-like rigag bread; saffron- and rose-infused halvah (a dense confectionary sweetened with honey); and aseeda (a cardamom–scented dessert that Johnston thinks should be the next pumpkin spice).

Recipes like those have helped Mirzam grow at a breakneck pace—it has doubled its production capacity every year since opening amid ever-growing demand and increased its staff from one to 75 in five years. A bit of scrappiness doesn’t hurt either. The company moved into a larger space and bought new heavy equipment in 2020, but due to pandemic-related travel restrictions, technicians were unable to travel to set up the new gear, so Johnston and her team had to figure out how to do so on their own.

Now, about five years after selling its first bars, Mirzam is still working on “producing amazing-quality chocolate,” Johnston says, a process she calls an “ongoing work.” The company’s goal for the next five years is to maintain quality at greater volume and to open another shop. But its ambitions have also grown to include a certain civic pride, if not outright boosterism. “It’s about working with Emirati recipes and artists, and highlighting the amazing things that are happening here in Dubai,” Johnston says.
or four decades, Pedrina López de Paz lived in shame, traumatized by the rape she endured as a 12-year-old at the hands of local militia, impoverished, bullied, and stigmatized. But as the 52-year-old Maya Achi survivor read her victim statement to a Guatemalan courtroom on Jan. 24, shame gave way to indignation. “I am a woman, I have endured pain,” she said. “Everything that happened has stayed in my body.”

It’s a story López de Paz shares with thousands of Indigenous women in Guatemala who suffered systematic sexual violence during the country’s 36-year civil war. Accused by the ruling elite of aiding leftist guerrilla forces, the country’s Mayan population was subjected to a genocidal campaign during which more than 160,000 were slaughtered. Mayan women bore the brunt of the military’s racist tactics—the Commission for Historical Clarification documented 1,465 cases of sexual violence between 1960 and the war’s end in 1996, of which 89% of victims were Indigenous women. The commission stressed that the figure did not reflect the true scale of sexual violence, due to the difficulties in reporting and gathering evidence. For survivors like López de Paz—whose parents were abducted at the time of her rape and never seen again, leaving her to care for her four younger siblings—suppressing the memory of sexual violence was necessary for survival.

For 40 years, the Indigenous survivors of what has become known as the Silent Holocaust carried their trauma like López de Paz, in their bodies. That is, until dozens of victims from the Maya Achi community made the three-and-a-half-hour journey in January from their rural hometown of Rabinal to Guatemala City to make what happened to them public. “We are here, we are speaking the truth,” López de Paz told the court.

And finally, she was heard. In a critical ruling Jan. 24, the court sentenced five men to a total of 150 years in prison for rape and crimes against humanity, which they denied. Outside the courtroom, groups of women in their 50s and 60s laid flowers and candles on the ground. Others held colorful banners blazoned with the slogan, “We Are All Achi”—a sign of solidarity with their sisters in the courtroom.

A Maya Achi woman looks on during the reading of the sentence on sexual violence on Jan. 24, 2022 in Guatemala City, Guatemala. (Josue Decavele—Getty Images)
A Maya Achi woman looks on during the reading of the sentence on sexual violence on Jan. 24, 2022 in Guatemala City, Guatemala. Josue Decavele—Getty Images
It was a rare victory for Indigenous women in a country that has long undervalued them, but the case is far from over. At least three more men who were initially named in the case have yet to stand trial, and a fourth remains a fugitive, meaning dozens of survivors still are waiting to see their rapists put behind bars. And while Rabinal Legal Clinic, the law firm that represents the Achi women, is determined to see the other men face charges, observers of the case say lawyers and survivors should aim higher.

The next target should be “the people who put this whole strategy in motion,” says Dr. Jo-Marie Burt, an associate professor of Latin American Studies at George Mason University. By that, Burt means the Guatemalan army, which she fears could evade responsibility as survivors and perpetrators grow old and die, and as President Alejandro Giammattei’s government remains bogged down by accusations of corruption.

Mass rapes were “the result of the strategy deployed by the Guatemalan army during the internal armed conflict to defeat the guerrillas,” Burt told TIME from the trial, which she was documenting for Truth and Justice Guatemala, an organization that monitors transitional justice cases in the country. “It was very much a divide and conquer mentality.” The men in this case were members of the Civil Self-Defense Patrol (PAC), local militia forces created by the Guatemalan army as a means to control and subdue the rural, mostly Indigenous populations. Participation was officially voluntary, but many men were forced to join and inflict violence on their own communities. All five of the men sentenced in the Achi case were Achi themselves. Some of the victims were related to their attackers. While López de Paz saw her attackers jailed, many of the authority figures and power structures that sanctioned the destruction of Indigenous communities from within are still at large.

The ruling in January is only the second time that wartime sexual violence against Indigenous women has been successfully prosecuted in Guatemala. In 2016, a former military officer and a former commissioner were found guilty of the sexual enslavement of 15 Maya Q’eqchi’ women at a military base in the early 1980s. So normalized was the violence that women were injected with shots of contraceptives before being taken to special rooms where they were raped repeatedly by several men at a time. The Sepur Zarco trial—named after the military outposts in eastern Guatemala where the crimes were committed—was a watershed moment in the transitional justice process. In a historic ruling, the court not only sentenced the men who orchestrated the violence, it held the state responsibile for the use of rape as a weapon of war.

Sexual violence has been used as a weapon of genocide in wars across the world, from Rwanda to the former Yugoslavia, to undermine the social fabric of society. In Guatemala, the targeting of Mayan women became part of a strategy of ethnic cleansing.

“They attacked an element, a very important person in the community,” Lucía Xiloj, one of the lawyers representing the Maya Achi women, told TIME. “It wasn’t only for the purpose of excluding individual women. The damage transcended to the communities. That’s why the communities are totally disintegrated today.”

Maya Achí women perform an invocation of gratitude after the reading of the sentence on Jan. 24 2022 in Guatemala City, Guatemala. (Josue Decavele—Getty Images)
Maya Achí women perform an invocation of gratitude after the reading of the sentence on Jan. 24 2022 in Guatemala City, Guatemala. Josue Decavele—Getty Images
For the Maya Achi survivors who testified in court, the ordeal they faced in the early 1980s changed the course of their lives. The perpetrators followed a similar pattern for each crime: they killed or “disappeared” the women’s husbands before raping the women, many of whom were already pregnant, and destroying their homes and belongings.

Estefana Alvaro Sic lost her baby as a result of her rape. “I came to testify about everything I lived through,” she told the court. “I came with my feet, with my eyes because what happened to me has hurt me a lot.” Shunned by those who knew her, impoverished after the murder of her husband, she spent years struggling to feed her children. “I cry because I look at the people who have no pity,” she said of the perpetrators. “They have their corn, they have their car and I don’t even have food, I don’t have a husband, I am poor.”

Rabinal Legal Clinic, which represented the women involved in the Maya Achi trial, is an association of Indigenous lawyers, two of whom are Achi, and has worked to offer support to the victims. The firm provided psychological support to the victims in the 11-year investigation and preparation for the trial, which opened in 2011. “Most women 40 years later still have symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder, depression, and anxiety,” Melissa González, the women’s psychologist, told TIME. “The after-effects have not advanced much, of course, but they persist.”

The stigma that the women carried back to their communities had a particularly pernicious effect on the women’s self-esteem. “We were asking them if their community knows about the sentencing,” González said. “They said ‘no, when we leave we won’t tell the truth, because it’s just a waste of time.’ Generally they receive many, many accusations. They are very stigmatised in their community.”

When López de Paz’s husband found out on their wedding night, when she was 15, that she had been raped, he attacked her. She testified in court that she later had three miscarriages, and when her first son was born, her womb “came out all at once.”

In their defense, the lawyers for the five men—who all pleaded not guilty—tried to undermine the women’s testimonies by claiming they were either false or could not be proven. It was a tactic that, to the women, made no sense. “They are accusing us of fabricating what we have been saying for 11 years?” one of the survivors asked Xiloj. “I could be happy there in my house, taking care of my chickens, there with my husband, with my grandchildren. What need do I have to be here if it weren’t for the fact that I am demanding justice?’”

The women haven’t always sought recognition of the violence they experienced. Xiloj says lawyers only discovered the incidents of mass rape in Rabinal when the survivors came to document a massacre to the Inter-American Court of Human Rights. “They came to denounce the disappearance of their husbands, the disappearance of their fathers, the murder of their children,” she said. “But they didn’t talk about what had happened to themselves.”

Portraits of missing persons within Guatemalan internal armed conflict, are displayed by human rights' organization "Hijos" during a protest at Justice square in Guatemala City on April 6 2018. (Johan Ordonez—AFP/Getty Images)
Portraits of missing persons within Guatemalan internal armed conflict, are displayed by human rights' organization "Hijos" during a protest at Justice square in Guatemala City on April 6 2018. Johan Ordonez—AFP/Getty Images
As the lawyers developed relationships with the women, they encouraged them to speak further about what had happened to them, a slow process given their damaged self-esteem. “At first they did not consider themselves as people who had the right to demand that the truth be known,” Xiloj says. The women’s primary language, Achi, does not have a word for rape. When the women did eventually describe what happened to them, they used alternative words or phrases—such as “they defiled my body,” and “they passed over me.”

The contrast between the women then and now is stark. A child at the time of her rape, like many of the victims—the Commission for Historical Clarification found that a third of rape victims were adolescents and children—López de Paz spent decades of her life burying what had happened to her. But speaking to TIME following the sentencing, she said she felt vindicated. “Yes, there was shame,” she said. “But I’m happy now, because the public realised that we’re not lying.”

Progress has been made in bringing the leaders of the genocide to justice. In August, a court ruled that the architect of the PAC, former head of the army Manuel Benedicto Lucas García, would stand trial for genocide, crimes against humanity, and forced kidnappings from 1978 to 1982. He has been held in preventative detention since 2016. Among a dozen of other human rights cases going through the Guatemalan courts, currently 12 senior and mid-ranking military and police officials are in the evidentiary phase for charges relating to the forced disappearances, rapes, and murders of at least 195 people from 1983 to 1986.However, Burt explains that these cases are pressing forward against great odds. Giammattei’s government, which has faced accusations of corruption since he assumed office in 2020, has strengthened its control of the Attorney General’s Office, undermining the independence of the judiciary. In 2019, under former President Jimmy Morales, a United Nations-backed anti-corruption commission, which oversaw the indictment of both the former president, Efraín Ríos Montt, and former vice-president, Roxana Baldetti, was forced to close its doors. The lead judge in the Achi case, Yassmín Barrios, who also oversaw the Sepur Zarco case in 2016, faced a backlash when she convicted Ríos Montt of genocide in 2013—10 days later, the ruling was overturned by a higher court. Less than a year later, Barrios was briefly sanctioned by the Guatemalan Bar Association in what many saw as a politically motivated move. Ríos Montt died in 2018 before his retrial had been completed.

Maya Achi women, victims of sexual violence during the Guatemalan internal armed conflict (1960-1996), hold a ceremony at the beginning of the trial against five former Civil Self-Defense Patrol (PAC) members, outside the Justice Palace in Guatemala City on Jan. 4, 2022. (Johan Ordonez—AFP/Getty Images)
Maya Achi women, victims of sexual violence during the Guatemalan internal armed conflict (1960-1996), hold a ceremony at the beginning of the trial against five former Civil Self-Defense Patrol (PAC) members, outside the Justice Palace in Guatemala City on Jan. 4, 2022. Johan Ordonez—AFP/Getty Images
Despite the efforts of judges like Barrios, the judicial system in Guatemala is by nature exclusionary to Indigenous communities. Many Mayans can only communicate in their Indigenous dialects, and do not speak Spanish, the country’s official language. Burt witnessed a judge’s ruling in 2019 that dismissed the case against the three men yet to stand trial in the Achi rape case: “All of the women were in the gallery, and none of them understood what was going on until we exited the room, and the lawyers then explained to them what had happened.”

Rabinal Legal Clinic is currently appealing the pre-trial judge’s dismissal of the charges against the three remaining men. As the window to prosecute aging and dying officials closes, observers like Burt believe the Biden administration should step up to strengthen anti-impunity efforts in the Central American country. But the U.S. is sending mixed messages. In July, the U.S. suspended its cooperation with the Guatemalan Attorney General’s Office after it fired a prominent anti-corruption prosecutor. Five months later, however, Washington’s National Security Advisor met with Guatemala’s President and “applauded the Giammattei government’s work to combat criminal organizations involved in the trafficking and smuggling of drugs and people.”

The U.S. played an instrumental role in the Guatemalan civil war, helping to overthrow a democratically elected president in 1954 and funding the military’s persecution of leftist guerrilla forces. In 1999, President Bill Clinton made a rare apology, acknowledging the responsibility of the CIA. in the murder of communist insurgents and citizens alike. Yet, the U.S. government under Biden is loosening its responsibility to the Central American country. “The fundamental problem is they’re looking at Central America through the prism of the migration issue, because that issue was so politicised under Trump,” Burt says. Thousands of Guatemalan migrants arrive at the U.S. border every year, seeking an escape from poverty, alleged corruption and violence.

What’s needed, Burt argues, is targeted sanctions against those in power. This would not affect the general population, she says, but would signal international condemnation of a government sliding into soft authoritarianism.

For the Maya Achi women, getting justice is an ongoing process. Following the verdict on Jan. 24, the court held a reparations hearing to identify the compensation the victims were owed by the state. On Jan. 27, the court granted each plaintiff 300,000 Guatemalan quetzal ($39,000), access to new health centers for the community and medical treatment. Symbolic reparations, such as the production of a documentary and education grants for the women’s children and grandchildren, were also approved.

López de Paz views the reparations as an acknowledgement of the pain she still suffers today. “It’s my right,” she says. “I want them to replace what they took. The things they burned. My animals.” She also demanded that the men reveal the site of her parents’ remains—although they deny any involvement in their deaths. “It hurts to remember. I want it to be known that I suffered.”

She and the surviving Maya Achi women will also continue their search for justice as their lawyers attempt to bring the three men dismissed from the case to trial. This possibility is what keeps López de Paz going: “We have to keep fighting. It’s no longer the time to sleep.”
Great wars sometimes start over small offenses. A murdered duke. An angered pope. The belief of a lonely king that his rivals aren’t playing fair. When historians study why armies began gathering in Europe during the plague of 2021, their interest might turn to a teenage girl, the goddaughter of Moscow’s isolated sovereign.

Her name is Daria, a young Ukrainian with a shy smile and big brown eyes. When she was born in 2004, her parents asked their friend Vladimir Putin, then a few years into his reign in Russia, to christen her in the Orthodox tradition they all share. The girl’s father, Viktor Medvedchuk, has been close to Putin for decades. They holiday together on the Black Sea. They conduct business. They obsess over the bonds between their countries and the Western forces they see pulling them apart.

“Our relationship has developed over 20 years,” Medvedchuk told me in a rare interview last spring in Kyiv, near the start of the current standoff between Russia and the West over Ukraine. “I don’t want to say I exploit that relationship, but you could say it has been part of my political arsenal.”


Guillaume Binet—MYOP
Putin could say the same about Medvedchuk. The leading voice for Russian interests in Ukraine, Medvedchuk’s political party is the biggest opposition force in parliament, with millions of supporters. Over the past year, that party has come under attack. Medvedchuk was charged with treason in May and placed under house arrest in Kyiv. Just last month, the U.S. accused him and his allies of plotting to stage a coup with help from the Russian military.

Read more: What the West Will Never Understand About Putin’s Ukraine Obsession

Throughout his 21 years in power, Putin has seen Ukraine as a fraternal nation, tied to Russia by bonds of faith, family, politics, and a millennium of common history. He has spent the past seven years using every tool at his disposal, including coercion and outright invasion, to preserve those ties, as the Ukrainian people increasingly turn toward the West. Short of war, one of the best ways that Putin has to influence Ukraine is through Medvedchuk and his political party. So it should not be surprising that Russia’s military standoff with the West has escalated in step with the crackdown against his friend.

Medvedchuk, center, faces treason charges in Kyiv (Sputnik/AP)
Medvedchuk, center, faces treason charges in Kyiv Sputnik/AP
Last February, days after the Inauguration of President Joe Biden, America’s allies in Kyiv decided to get tough on Medvedchuk. The Ukrainian government started by taking his TV channels off the air, depriving Russia of its propaganda outlets in the country. The U.S. embassy in Kyiv applauded the move. About two weeks later, on Feb. 19, 2021, Ukraine announced that it had seized the assets of Medvedchuk’s family. Among the most important, it said, was a pipeline that brings Russian oil to Europe, enriching Medvedchuk and his family—including Putin’s goddaughter, Daria—and helping to bankroll Medvedchuk’s political party.

The first inkling of Putin’s response came less than two days later, at 7 a.m. on Feb. 21. In a little-noticed statement, the Russian Defense Ministry announced the deployment of 3,000 paratroopers to the border with Ukraine for “large-scale exercises,” training them to “seize enemy structures and hold them until the arrival of the main force.” Those soldiers were the first in a military buildup that has since grown to more than 100,000 Russian troops. In their scramble to respond, the U.S. and its allies have sent planeloads of weapons to Ukraine and thousands of troops to secure the eastern flank of the NATO alliance.

The resulting standoff has revived the tensions of the Cold War and pushed Europe to the brink of a major military conflict. In trying to discern Putin’s motives, observers have raised his strategic wish to humble the Americans, divide the Europeans, and restore Moscow’s influence over the lands it controlled before its empire crumbled in 1991. But the roots of the crisis have been overlooked. To understand Putin’s objectives, you have to understand both his personal and political ties to Ukraine, as well as his long-standing aim to bring the nation under his control. When Medvedchuk was placed under house arrest, the Russian leader called the attack on his proxies “an absolutely obvious purge of the political field,” one that threatened to turn Ukraine “into Russia’s antithesis, a kind of anti-Russia.”

Read more: Alexei Navalny Urges Biden to Stand Up to Putin

Few people have a clearer vantage on Putin’s response than the alleged coup plotter, Medvedchuk. In the year before the crisis escalated, he met with Putin several times at his residence near Moscow, despite the pandemic protocols that have kept the Russian leader isolated from all but his top aides. The question that now fills headlines around the world—What does Putin want?—is not a matter of conjecture for his closest friend in Kyiv.

It took me a while to find Medvedchuk’s office amid the alleys of the city center. The address led to an old apartment block near the end of a steep slope, with no outward sign of its political significance. Behind the unmarked door, a handful of armed guards looked at me in silence. One proceeded to search my bag, demanding to know whether it contained a knife or “any kind of shiv.” Medvedchuk was more cordial. Dressed in a fitted blue suit, he had the look of a Ken doll’s father—stiff, tanned, and manicured, with an angular jaw. Upon entering the conference room, he strutted over to a thermostat and asked, “Are you warm enough?”

The story of his friendship with Putin, he said, goes back to the early years of Putin’s presidency. Medvedchuk was chief of staff to Putin’s counterpart in Kyiv, and they often met at official functions. At the time, Russia had all the influence it wanted in Ukraine. Its economy depended on Russia for cheap gas and cheaper loans, and its leaders had no intention of joining any Western alliances.

To strengthen their bond with the Russian leader, Medvedchuk and his wife, a famous news anchor in Ukraine, asked Putin to be the godfather of their newborn. They have stayed close ever since. In one interview on Russian state TV, Medvedchuk recalled how Putin doted on Daria, bringing her a bouquet of flowers and a teddy bear, when he visited the Medvedchuks at their villa in Crimea.

Medvedchuk on vacation with his daughter Daria (Courtesy of Viktor Medvedchuk)
Medvedchuk on vacation with his daughter Daria Courtesy of Viktor Medvedchuk
Their friendship only grew closer after 2014, when a revolution tore their countries apart. Protesters built an encampment on Kyiv’s central square that winter, demanding Ukrainian leaders fight corruption and integrate with the West. More than two months of clashes with police ended on a frigid February morning, when security forces opened fire on the demonstrators, killing dozens of them in the streets.

The regime collapsed the following day. Its leaders fled across the border to Russia, and as their political party fell apart, so did the machinery of Russian influence over its neighbor. “There is no legitimate authority in Ukraine now,” Putin fumed in a speech at the Kremlin that spring. “No one to talk to.” The revolution, he claimed, was nothing more than a U.S.-backed coup, and he responded by ordering his troops to invade. After swiftly taking over Crimea, Russian forces moved into the coal-mining heartland of eastern Ukraine, installing separatist puppet regimes in two of its biggest cities.

Read more: The Man Putin Fears

As Ukraine fought back in the east, its capital became a political battleground. The remnants of the pro-Russian establishment set out to build new parties in Ukraine, each vying for the old regime’s voters. “We knew Putin does not want chaos and war in Ukraine in the long term,” says an adviser to one of the Ukrainian oligarchs who funded these parties. “He wants a protectorate, a loyal government, like he had before.” Russia’s allies in Kyiv wanted the right to run for office, to buy up industries, and to control TV networks. As the Russian lawmaker Konstantin Zatulin explained it to me at the time: “This would be our compromise. Russia would have its own soloists in the great Ukrainian choir, and they would sing for us.” Under that arrangement, he added, “We would have no need to tear Ukraine apart.”

The U.S. was not open to that kind of deal, and the Obama Administration took a hard line against Russia’s operatives in Kyiv. Many of them were sanctioned right after Russia invaded in March 2014; Medvedchuk was at the top of the blacklist. Still, by the end of 2018, the pro-Russian parties achieved a breakthrough in Ukraine, forming an alliance called Opposition Platform—For Life. Backed by billionaires sympathetic to Moscow, they owned three television networks in Ukraine. And their party’s chairman was Putin’s old friend Medvedchuk.

During elections held the following year, Ukraine voted in a new President, an actor and comedian named Volodymyr Zelensky. His popularity derived from a hit sitcom called Servant of the People, in which he starred as a fictional President. Three months later, Zelensky’s political party won a majority in parliament. But Medvedchuk’s faction came in second place, making it the biggest opposition force in the country. “Millions of citizens voted for us,” Medvedchuk told me. “Putin gave a promise to protect them.”

Read more: Russia Has Been Warning About Ukraine for Decades. The West Should Have Listened

Medvedchuk’s TV channels worked to weaken the new government. “They were eating into the electoral base, just destroying Zelensky,” says the President’s first national security adviser, Oleksandr Danyliuk. The networks were especially relentless in attacking the government’s response to the COVID-19 pandemic and its failure to secure vaccine supplies from Western allies. When Russia released its own vaccine in August 2020, Medvedchuk, his wife, and their daughter Daria were among the first to get it. They then flew to Moscow to talk to Putin. It was the first public meeting the Russian leader had with anyone—unmasked, on camera, and without social distancing—since the pandemic began. Their talks that day resulted in a deal for Russia to supply Ukraine with millions of doses of its vaccine, and to allow Ukrainian labs to produce it free of charge.

When Medvedchuk brought the offer to Kyiv, the government rejected it. So did the U.S. State Department, which accused Russia of using its vaccine as a tool of political influence. But as the death toll mounted in Ukraine—and no vaccine shipments arrived from the West—voters turned away from Zelensky in droves. By the fall of 2020, his approval ratings fell well below 40%, compared with over 70% a year earlier. In some polls taken that December, Medvedchuk’s party was in the lead.

Viktor Medvedchuk meeting Putin near Moscow in October 2020 (Alexei Druzhinin—TASS/Getty Images)
Viktor Medvedchuk meeting Putin near Moscow in October 2020 Alexei Druzhinin—TASS/Getty Images
Zelensky grew especially concerned about the party’s television channels, which he condemned as messengers of Russian propaganda. When he decided to take those channels off the air last February, it was not only a defensive move, says Danyliuk, his former security adviser. It was also conceived as a welcome gift to the Biden Administration, which had made the fight against international corruption a pillar of its foreign policy. As Danyliuk put it, the decision to go after Putin’s friend “was calculated to fit in with the U.S. agenda.”

Throughout the ensuing military crisis, the U.S. has had no ambassador in Kyiv. The last one, Marie Yovanovitch, was fired in April 2019 after she ran afoul of President Trump’s campaign to extract political favors from Ukraine. Trump wanted the Ukrainians to investigate the Biden family, and he froze military aid to Kyiv as a means of pressure. The resulting scandal led to Trump’s first impeachment in the House, and it left the U.S. embassy in Kyiv hollowed out and demoralized.

“My chain of command went to sh-t,” says Suriya Jayanti, who was then a senior diplomat at the embassy. “We just disappeared.” That did not change, she says, after Biden took office last year. His top foreign policy staff was focused on confronting China, she says, and they tended to see Russia as a nuisance to be managed or ignored. “His team didn’t care about Russia,” Jayanti told me in Kyiv last fall, shortly before she resigned from government. “And they didn’t want to hear about Ukraine.” Only in recent days, nearly a year into the crisis, did Biden pick a new ambassador to Kyiv, who has not yet been installed.


Lon Tweeten/TIME
A senior U.S. official tells TIME that Ukraine has always been a top priority for the Administration: “There has been very extensive and almost constant focus on Ukraine from day one.” When the Zelensky government decided to go after Medvedchuk, the U.S. welcomed it as part of Ukraine’s struggle to “counter Russian malign influence,” the official said. The methods used in this struggle have been novel and controversial. Rather than working through the justice system, Zelensky has imposed sanctions against Ukrainian tycoons and politicians, freezing their assets by decree.

This strategy, which the government calls “de-oligarchization,” has targeted many of Zelensky’s domestic opponents and, in particular, their television channels. The U.S. has avoided criticizing the crackdown, not wanting to “micromanage” what Ukraine was doing, said the senior U.S. official. But in the case of Medvedchuk, the U.S. embassy cheered Zelensky on. “We support Ukraine’s efforts to protect its sovereignty and territorial integrity through sanctions,” the embassy said in a tweet last February, the day after the sanctions froze Medvedchuk’s assets.

The party leader was furious. “This is political repression,” Medvedchuk told me. “All my bank accounts are frozen. I can’t manage my assets. I can’t even pay my utility bills.”

In April, as Russian forces assembled at the border, Zelensky traveled to the front lines to meet his troops, and invited me to come along. Military helicopters got us most of the way to the trenches, but the last few hundred paces required a hike through the mud with a handful of soldiers and bodyguards. One of them lugged a big machine gun, with boxes of shells latched to his belt.

The President spent the day talking to his troops, dining with them, and handing out medals. Considering the number of Russian tanks poised to invade from across the nearby border, he seemed remarkably upbeat. We spent the night near the garrison, and he arrived at the mess hall for breakfast in a track suit, fresh from a morning jog through the war zone.

Read more: Documents Reveal Erik Prince’s $10 Billion Plan to Make Weapons and Create a Private Army in Ukraine

On the flight back that day, we talked about Medvedchuk and his TV networks, and whether it seemed wise in hindsight to shut them down. Zelensky made no apologies. “I consider them devils,” the President told me. “Their narratives seek to disarm Ukraine of its statehood.” As the Kyiv skyline appeared through the window and the plane began to descend, Zelensky grew upset. “Al Capone killed a lot of people, but he got locked up over his taxes,” he told me. “I think these TV channels killed a lot of people through the information war.”

Some of his advisers, especially in the intelligence community, were less enthusiastic about the move against Medvedchuk. “At least he’s the devil we know,” one retired spy chief told me in Kyiv, agreeing to discuss the issue on condition of anonymity. Since Russia first started the war in 2014, Medvedchuk has served as one of the lead negotiators in numerous rounds of peace talks, often winning the release of prisoners of war. “He has direct access to Putin,” the spy chief told me. That kind of access is rare, he says, and it has made Medvedchuk an effective mediator.

Zelensky was not moved by such arguments. On May 12, about a month after our trip to the front lines, Ukrainian authorities issued an arrest warrant for Medvedchuk. Prosecutors alleged that he had profited from the Russian occupation of Crimea, and they charged him with treason. A court ordered him to remain under house arrest pending trial, cut off from his voters and prevented from attending sessions of parliament.

U.S. law enforcement went after his allies. Oleh Voloshyn, a prominent member of Medvedchuk’s party, was greeted by the FBI when he arrived in Washington last July. Two agents approached him at Dulles International Airport and asked to have a word in private, away from his wife and infant son, who were traveling with him. Voloshyn, who serves as Medvedchuk’s envoy in the West, spent the next three hours answering the agents’ questions. “They took my cell phone,” Voloshyn told me of the incident, which has not been previously reported. “And they took all the information from my cell phone.”

Voloshyn, whom the U.S. has accused of being part of a coup plot, at his office in Kyiv Jan. 29 (Maxim Dondyuk for TIME)
Voloshyn, whom the U.S. has accused of being part of a coup plot, at his office in Kyiv Jan. 29 Maxim Dondyuk for TIME
In a statement on Jan. 20, the U.S. government leveled an astonishing series of allegations against Voloshyn and Medvedchuk. It claimed that they are part of an ongoing Kremlin plot to install a puppet government in Ukraine, propped up by a Russian military occupation. “Russia has directed its intelligence services to recruit current and former Ukrainian government officials to prepare to take over the government of Ukraine and to control Ukraine’s critical infrastructure with an occupying Russian force,” said the statement from the U.S. Treasury Department, which imposed sanctions on Voloshyn and other alleged plotters.

When we spoke by phone the following day, Voloshyn had already pulled his money out of the bank and was preparing to leave Kyiv with his family. “Maybe Serbia,” he says of his destination. “Maybe Russia.” He told me he has no intention of taking power in Ukraine with help from the Russian military, and said the aim of his party was always to win power peacefully—either through elections or, as Voloshyn put it, a diplomatic “compromise” between the Russia and the West. “There is no third option,” he says. “Russia either gets the influence it wants by peaceful means, or it gets it by force.”

With Medvedchuk sidelined and his party in retreat, the Kremlin has no clear path to influence over Ukraine through politics, and that raises the temptation to use hard power, Voloshyn told me. “You have to understand,” he says. “There are hawks around Putin who want this crisis. They are ready to invade. They come to him and say, ‘Look at your Medvedchuk. Where is he now? Where is your peaceful solution? Sitting under house arrest? Should we wait until all pro-Russian forces are arrested?’”

Nearly 12 months since it began, the crisis in Ukraine has become far bigger and more dangerous than any political grudge. In early December, as over 100,000 Russian troops stood at the border with Ukraine, Biden held a call with Putin to defuse the tensions. According to the White House, the President offered to hear out all of Russia’s “strategic concerns,” opening the door to a far more sweeping set of talks. It was a breakthrough for Putin to get a U.S. President to engage with him on the future of the NATO alliance, which Putin has long described as the main threat to Russian security.

The response from Russian diplomats smacked of an old negotiating tactic: start high. They demanded a written guarantee from the U.S. that Ukraine would never join NATO. They also told the U.S. to withdraw its military forces from Eastern Europe, retreating to positions they held before Putin took power. As the lead Russian envoy put it ahead of talks in January, “NATO needs to pack up its stuff and get back to where it was in 1997.” Rather than defusing the standoff, Biden’s overture allowed Russia to air a long list of grievances against the West, unleashing what one Kremlin insider in Moscow described to me as “an enormous pile of pent-up tensions.”

A satellite image taken Dec. 23 shows a deployment of Russian troops at the Opuk training ground in Crimea (Maxar Tech/AFP/Getty Images)
A satellite image taken Dec. 23 shows a deployment of Russian troops at the Opuk training ground in Crimea Maxar Tech/AFP/Getty Images
As the talks progressed through January, Russians came to believe they had the upper hand as long as they could keep up the military pressure on Ukraine. “It’s the perfect time to make some trades, to get sanctions removed, to talk about security concerns,” says the Kremlin insider, who agreed to discuss the negotiations on condition of anonymity. “The logic is simple,” the source adds. “If we don’t put a lot of fear into them, we will not get to a clear solution, because that’s just how the Western system works. It’s very hard for them to reach a consensus on something. All those moving parts, all those checks and balances, each one pulling in different directions. So the aim is to present a threat of such massive consequences that it forces everyone on that side to agree.”

The gambit appears to be failing. The U.S. has rejected Russia’s core demands out of hand, and prepared a raft of sanctions that would cut much of the Russian economy off from the rest of the world. “The gradualism of the past is out, and this time we’ll start at the top of the escalation ladder and stay there,” says a senior Administration official.

Biden has begun to warn Ukraine and other allies that a Russian invasion looks imminent. Over 8,500 U.S. troops were put on high alert in January, prepared to deploy to Eastern Europe alongside naval ships and warplanes. The State Department ordered nonessential staff and family members to leave the U.S. embassy in Kyiv, it said, out of “an abundance of caution.”

Ukrainian forces on a joint patrol Jan. 9 near the border with Belarus (Tyler Hicks—The New York Times/REDUX)
Ukrainian forces on a joint patrol Jan. 9 near the border with Belarus Tyler Hicks—The New York Times/REDUX
It is far from clear whether peace talks can bring Europe back from the brink of war, or what Putin might consider a face-saving compromise. Under the Kremlin’s pandemic protocols, the Russian leader has been more isolated during this crisis than at any point in his career. In early January, when he would normally celebrate Orthodox Christmas among the crowds at a Russian cathedral, the Kremlin issued footage of the President alone with a priest, solemnly holding a candle in the chapel of his private residence. “Very few people can speak to him now,” the Kremlin insider told me. “The world inside his head is only his own.”

In Kyiv, Putin’s friend is even more isolated. Stripped of its main TV channels and beset by criminal charges, Medvedchuk’s party has been sinking in the polls. Medvedchuk remains under house arrest, with a tracking device affixed to his ankle and police officers stationed outside his home. His daughter’s security was such a concern that he declined to say anything about her whereabouts. But one of his associates told me that Daria remains in Kyiv, surrounded by private security guards. The main concern, the associate said, is kidnapping. “But yes, she’s still here.”

—With reporting by Leslie Dickstein and Simmone Shah/New York; and Brian Bennett, W.J. Hennigan, and Nik Popli/Washington
ARussia-linked cybercrime gang was allegedly responsible for ransomware attacks that took down a swath of Germany’s fuel-distribution system this week and hindered payments at some filling stations.

Hackers using a strain of ransomware known as “Black Cat” infected computers at Mabanaft GmbH and Oiltanking GmbH Group, according to two people familiar with an investigation into the breaches.

Ransomware is a type of malicious software that encrypts files on victims’ computers, rendering them inaccessible until a ransom is paid. It’s not known how much money the Black Cat gang has demanded from the firms.

The hackers behind Black Cat appear to be related to the DarkSide ransomware gang, according to Brett Callow, a threat analyst at the cybersecurity firm Emsisoft. DarkSide was accused of the attack on Colonial Pipeline Co. last year, shutting down the largest gasoline pipeline in the U.S. for several days in May.

Other energy-storage companies, including Evos Group, have also suffered IT problems in recent days, at facilities spanning Malta, Belgium and the Netherlands. The precise cause of the disruption at Evos is currently unclear. On Thursday, the firm said the source was still being investigated.

The attacks come amid heightened tensions in the region as Russian troops are massed on the Ukrainian border, raising fears of an imminent ground attack. Such an attack could imperil Russian fuel supplies to Germany and other parts of Europe. Russian President Vladimir Putin has repeatedly denied he plans to invade.

Mabanaft, which distributes large amounts of fuel across Germany, said on Tuesday that its computer systems had been breached and its operations disrupted. Oiltanking GmbH Group, which operates terminals internationally, confirmed that its systems were also affected by the cyberattack. Both companies are owned by the Hamburg-based fuel group Marquard & Bahls AG.

A spokesperson for the companies declined to comment on the ransomware. The companies discovered they had been “the victim of a cyber incident” on January 29 and were working with specialists to investigate, the spokesperson said. They were hoping to resume normal operations by early next week, according to the people.

The prosecutor’s office in Hamburg said it had opened an investigation into the breach but hadn’t yet identified a suspect. “At the moment no information concerning the perpetrator behind the attack can be provided,” said Liddy Oechtering, a spokeswoman for the prosecutor’s office. “So far the investigations are directed against unknown.”

The German newspaper Handelsblatt previously reported that the hackers used the Black Cat ransomware, citing a report from Germany’s Federal Office for Information Security. The two people familiar with the investigation confirmed that account to Bloomberg News.

Black Cat’s ransomware code is written in Russian and is known for its “sophistication and innovation,” according to a report published in January by researchers at Unit 42, a cybersecurity team at Palo Alto Networks. The gang, which has been active since November 2021, has recruited “affiliates” on cybercrime forums who effectively rent out the ransomware to hack companies and organizations, according to the report.

Doel Santos, a threat intelligence analyst for Unit 42, said that hackers using Black Cat’s ransomware, which is also known as ALPHV, had been “very active” since December. They were targeting a wide range of industries, including construction and engineering, retail, transportation, commercial services, insurance, machinery, professional services, telecommunication, auto components and pharmaceuticals, he said. The gang has focused its extortion efforts on companies and organizations in countries including the U.S., Germany, France, Spain, Philippines, and the Netherlands, the Unit 42 report found.

“What’s unusual is that for a new group they are very skilled,” said Allan Liska, a senior threat analyst at the cybersecurity firm Recorded Future Inc. “The methodology is the same across all of these ransomware groups. But Black Cat moves around networks quickly. They get the data quickly, and they are not afraid to go after big targets.” Liska added that people involved in the gang appeared to be native Russian speakers, as indicated by their posts on Russian-language cybercrime forums.

Liska called the timing of the attacks suspicious but said it wasn’t yet clear whether there was any link to the tensions in Ukraine.

Callow, from Emsisoft, said he believed Black Cat was likely the latest incarnation of the prolific ransomware groups BlackMatter and DarkSide.

After the Colonial Pipeline attack drew widespread condemnation and pressure from law enforcement, DarkSide rebranded under a different name, BlackMatter, a common tactic by ransomware gangs when they come under intense scrutiny.

But BlackMatter didn’t last long either, Callow said, in part because Emsisoft discovered a vulnerability in its ransomware that helped victims recover their files without paying any ransom.

The organizers of the group hired new developers and rebranded again, under the name Black Cat, Callow said.

Callow said that the new Black Cat ransomware was more sophisticated and didn’t include the same errors in its code as ransomware strains deployed by previous incarnations of the gang.

Authorities in Germany have described the hacks this week as serious, but played down the level of disruption to the country’s fuel supplies. A spokesman for the country’s Federal Office for Information Security said that 233 gasoline filling stations, largely in northern Germany, had been affected, only 1.7% of the country’s total. At some of those stations it wasn’t possible to pay by credit card, the spokesman said.

—With assistance from Jack Wittels and Rachel Graham.
Canada’s capital city declared a state of emergency Sunday as police struggled to rein in protests against vaccine mandates and Covid-19 restrictions.

Ottawa Mayor Jim Watson, who declared the emergency, said that increasingly rowdy demonstrations posed a “serious danger and threat to the safety and security of residents.” Hundreds of trucks continue to occupy the downtown area near Canada’s parliament with no sign that the protesters plan to leave.

Truckers and their supporters have been stockpiling jerry cans of diesel and other necessities. They built a wood shed as a kitchen and set up logistics centers in a downtown park and the parking lot of a baseball stadium.

But on Sunday, police fenced off the park and showed up at the stadium location to seize fuel cans, propane cannisters and vehicles. A total of seven people were arrested as part of investigations related to the protests, according to a statement from the Ottawa Police Service. It said there are more the 60 active criminal investigations, primarily for mischief, thefts, hate crimes and property damage.

Police march towards Wellington Street on February 5, 2022 in Ottawa, Canada. (Minas Panagiotakis/Getty Images)
Police march towards Wellington Street on February 5, 2022 in Ottawa, Canada. Minas Panagiotakis/Getty Images
The protests started in reaction to Canadian and U.S. laws that went into effect in January, requiring truckers crossing the border to be fully vaccinated. They’ve since morphed into a rally against Covid restrictions more broadly. Demonstrators have been camped out in the capital since Jan. 28.

The Canadian protest, which expanded to cities across the country this weekend, was championed by the likes of Fox News and by podcaster Joe Rogan, Tesla Inc. billionaire Elon Musk and former U.S. President Donald Trump.

In Ottawa, the truckers’ blockade of streets and use of air horns for days—sometimes deep into the night—has angered residents. The city’s police force warned people that they could be arrested for bringing “material supports,” including fuel, to the protest zone.

“The situation at this point is completely out of control because the individuals with the protest are calling the shots,” Watson said early Sunday in an interview with CFRA, a local radio station. “They have far more people than we have police officers.”

The state of emergency “highlights the need for support from other jurisdictions and levels of government,” the city said Sunday night. It was unclear to what extent Ottawa would receive outside help.

Last week, Prime Minister Justin Trudeau seemed to rule out using the army to disperse the protesters, but the demonstrations have intensified since then. Ontario Premier Doug Ford said his government, which has ultimate responsibility over local policing, has given Ottawa city hall “everything they have asked for and will continue to provide whatever support they request.”

Supporters against vaccine mandates continue to rally into the night on Feb. 5, 2022 in Ottawa, Canada. (Minas Panagiotakis/Getty Images)
Supporters against vaccine mandates continue to rally into the night on Feb. 5, 2022 in Ottawa, Canada. Minas Panagiotakis/Getty Images
The nerves of local Ottawa residents are “frayed beyond belief” and they’re suffering as protesters blare horns and ignite fireworks, Watson said. Additional officers from the Royal Canadian Mounted Police are being brought in from other parts of the province, he said.

“Clearly, we’re outnumbered and we’re losing this battle right now,” Watson said. “This has to be reversed. We have to get our city back.”

Protests in other Canadian cities went off over the weekend with mostly minor incidents. Toronto police arrested a 22-year-old man after he set off a smoke bomb. In Winnipeg, police arrested a 42-year-old man who drove through a group of protesters downtown, injuring four.

In Vancouver, police arrested five people amid reports of cars being kicked and nails being thrown on roadways. One of them, a 29-year-old U.S. citizen from Washington state, was caught wearing a balaclava and pulling a wagon full of egg cartons. He had a knife in a sheath tied to his belt and two eggs in his jacket pocket, police said.
In October 2017, while on a work trip in Turkey, a man known as N3 received a life-changing phone call.

It was his mother on the other end, back home in Britain, where he had lived most of his life, with a letter that had arrived in the mail informing him he had been stripped of his British citizenship. He was accused of being “aligned to a group that is aligned with Al Qaeda,” but, even after all charges were dropped, he was never told what evidence they had against him.

The man, who has been identified only as N3 under legal proceedings to protect his privacy, had only meant to stay in Turkey for a few weeks. He says he was tying up loose ends on some projects, working with a U.K. charity to provide shelter for Syrian orphans and widows in Turkey, and developing an eco-friendly plastic alternative that he hoped might facilitate a trade between Bangladesh and Turkey. But when his citizenship was taken away, so too was the certainty of when he might return home to his mother and three young children.

“In the initial days my mind went completely blank,” N3 tells TIME over email through his lawyer, in his first interview since returning to the U.K. He spent three and a half years stuck in limbo, first in Turkey, then in France, all while fighting against the British government to regain his citizenship and return home to his family in the U.K.

N3’s story is the type of case that campaigners worry could be on the rise, particularly as the U.K. edges closer to making citizenship deprivation easier. The full extent of the practice is currently not publicly known because the British government does not disclose the number of people who have been stripped of their citizenship or the reasons for deprivation.

“When we first began capaigning on these issues a decade ago, we noticed a connection between [citizenship] deprivation and extrajudical state intervention, either through drone strikes or illegal rendition, imprisonment and torture,” says Muhammad Rabbani, the Managing Director of CAGE, an advocacy group that provides support for victims of the war on terror and helped N3 throughout his case. “The use of this power has dramatically increased in recent years, affecting aid workers, holiday makers and even entire families.”

The Free Movement, an organization which provides information on immigration and asylum law, has estimated through freedom of information requests that at least 464 people have been stripped of their citizenship since 2006. In 2017, the year N3 lost his citizenship, the U.K. saw a peak of 148 cases of citizenship deprivation.

Now, the Nationality and Borders bill, which is currently working its way through Parliament, seeks to grant the government further power in cases of citizenship deprivation. Clause 9, hastily added before the bill passed through the House of Commons after just 9 minutes of debate, would allow the government to strip an individual of British citizenship without providing warning, if it is not “reasonably practical” to do so, as long as that person is deemed to be eligible for citizenship elsewhere.

More than a hundred charities, creatives and professionals have signed a joint statement denouncing the bill as “overtly racist” and calling for an end to citizenship deprivation. A petition circulated at the end of last year demanding for Clause 9 to be removed gathered over 300,000 signatures.

“The Nationality and Borders Bill is a reprehensible assault on the right to asylum and citizenship,” says Rabbani. “Clause 9 cements the existence of a racist two tier citizenship deprivation regime and frees the hand of the Home Office to deprive people with even less scrutiny by doing away with the notification requirement.”

Under the current law, a person must be notified if their citizenship is revoked. Once becoming aware of the deprivation, individuals may appeal the decision through the Special Immigration Appeals Commission (SIAC). However, deprivation orders are often issued once an individual is already out of the country, as N3’s was, making it difficult to appeal. The individual is also not told what evidence is being used against them.

Fahad Ansari, an attorney who specializes in citizenship deprivation and who represented N3 in his legal case, notes that the passing of this bill would further complicate the appeals process. “Inevitably it is more difficult to appeal a decision that you know nothing about,” says Ansari.

In an emailed statement, a spokesperson for the Home Office said, “Our priority is to ensure the safety and security of the U.K. Deprivation of British citizenship only happens after very careful consideration of the facts and in accordance with international law.” The Home Office does not provide comment on individual cases, but the spokesperson noted that, “Each case is assessed individually on its own merits and always comes with the right of appeal.”

Under international law, a person cannot be deprived of their citizenship if it will make them stateless. The British government had issued its deprivation order against N3 on the assumption that he could claim citizenship in Bangladesh because he is of Bangladeshi heritage. As part of his appeal against the government’s decision, N3 argued that, because he had not claimed citizenship in Bangladesh when he turned 21, his right to citizenship there had lapsed.

In a legal observation published in January, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees warned that the bill undermines the 1951 Refugee Convention, of which the U.K. is a signatory, and that Clause 9 “would increase the risk of U.K. citizens, including children, being made stateless, in contravention of the U.K.’s international obligations.”

“There is a strong international consensus that the right to a nationality and the prohibition of arbitrary deprivation of nationality are fundamental principles of international law,” the observation states.

Soon after he learned of the deprivation order, Turkish intelligence officers came knocking. His name had been flagged to them by British authorities, but after conducting a background check, they told him he was free to live his life in Turkey, with the police checking in on him every few weeks. Still, he feared he might be deported or detained at any moment if the tides changed. His British passport had been invalidated by the deprivation order, leaving him unable to apply for a Turkish visa or residency.

In subsequent meetings, officers would bring up names and locations that made it clear to him that the interrogation efforts didn’t stem from Turkish intelligence. “I understood that these questions came from elsewhere,” he said.

As the appeal process dragged on, he tried to live as normally as possible under the circumstances. “I just had to get on with life,” he says of that time. He focused on his charity work and other small business interests he had, making enough money to get by.

“The Turkish intelligence officers told me clearly that had I had an ‘English’ name I would have been rewarded and given a medal for the great work I did,” says N3. “It stuck with me that even they could see the racism I was being subjected to.”

The U.K’s eroding citizenship rights
The U.K. has long held the power to strip citizenship, though has only begun to use it regularly in recent decades. “The practice goes back to the times of the World Wars when it was used to target nationals who had connections with enemy countries,” says Devyani Prabhat, a legal scholar at the University of Bristol who specializes in citizenship. The British Nationality and Status of Aliens Act 1918 introduced the practice of deprivation for disloyalty or treason, though the law and subsequent ones did not apply to British-born citizens. “This predates universal human rights and is a pre-globalisation idea, that having multiple allegiances puts national security at risk,” says Prabhat.

Between 1973 and 2006, not a single person in the U.K. was deprived of their citizenship. In 2003, shortly after the U.S. and U.K.-led invasion of Iraq, the Labour government loosened the law, removing protections against deprivation for individuals born into British citizenship and allowing the removal of citizenship of anyone seen as “seriously prejudicial to the vital interests of the United Kingdom or a British overseas territory,” in an effort to deport London Imam Abu Hamza, whose hate speech led to nationwide calls for his deportation. The conditions of the law were relaxed further in 2006, so that the government could revoke citizenship if an individual was seen as “not conducive to the public good,” Prabhat notes that this gave the government more discretion over who could be deprived of their citizenship. “This is a low threshold that can be used in a broad manner: there are no checks.”

Ansari notes that, because deprivation orders cannot be used against individuals with one citizenship, the law has a disproportionate impact on non-white citizens, who are more likely to have connections to other countries. “By enabling the Home Secretary to strip someone of their citizenship simply because he or she believes it is ‘not conducive to the public good’ for them to be British, parliament has given the government unprecedented power to act as judge, jury and executioner without adequate safeguards on the use of that power,” he says.

Some advocacy groups believe the crackdown is correlated to rising Islamophobia and fears of terrorism as some British citizens traveled to fight in Syria and Iraq in recent years. But, since the government does not share the details of the cases—or any evidence being used against an individual, there is little clarity about the rationale. Ansari notes that many of the recent cases have involved individuals located in South Asia, the Middle East and Africa.

“It is often a means for the Home Office to absolve itself of its legal responsibilities towards its citizens, as we’ve seen with the young abandoned children caught up in the prison camps in Syria,” says Rabbani.

The case of Shamima Begum, who was stripped of her citizenship after she left the U.K. to fight with the Islamic State in Syria in 2015, ignited public debate about the practice when she later sought to regain her citizenship.

“Recent cases have demonstrated that the power is being used against non-national security cases and it is a very slippery slope we are on,” says Ansari. “It is a far cry from what the government said in Parliament when seeking to change the test in 2002, arguing that it would only be used for ‘the most flagrant cases of disloyalty.’”

“It’s the principle of the thing,” says Prabhat. “If any one minister can take away your citizenship without showing any evidence and notifying you, what does it say about the value of citizenship?”

Read more: Shamima Begum and the Legality of Making a Citizen Stateless

Before it happened to him, N3 was unaware of the practice of citizenship deprivation, let alone that it was something that might impact him. “[The U.K. is] the only home I have on this planet.” He was born in Bangladesh, but moved to Britain with his family when he was 3 years old. He began his career doing gang mediation work for the council in the London neighborhood where he grew up. He later joined a charity and focused on international aid work. The majority of his work took him to Syria, where he organized emergency medical services, food distribution, and shelters for victims of the conflict.

“It was all together a very humbling and enriching experience,” he says. “There is a great sense of humility you gain through serving others, and being privileged enough to be in such a position.”

In 2013, while en route to Syria, he was stopped by intelligence officers in a U.K. airport, who he says only appeared concerned for his well-being. They asked about his travel arrangements, the amount of money he had on him, and paperwork.

“You are doing a fantastic job,” he says he was told. “Keep it up and good luck.”

When he was stopped another time during the summer of 2017, under section 7 of the Terrorism Act, it was more of a nuisance than cause for concern. He described the practice as “a regular inconvenience for Muslims travelling in and out of the U.K.” He had expected them to question him about his work in Syria, but instead, he was asked about his political opinions and personal beliefs. Still, he was not alarmed. “I appreciated they needed to carry out some due diligence,” says N3.

He later returned to Turkey without incident. “I had no reason to suspect that anything was amiss,” he says.

Appealing citizenship deprivation
A year after his appeal began, the SIAC ruled that the government had unlawfully stripped N3 of his citizenship. Within weeks, the U.K.’s Home Office appealed the decision. N3 decided to wait in Turkey, unsure if the appeal would impact his ability to travel on his passport. But when it came time for the Home Office’s appeal to be heard in court, N3 knew he wanted to be there when it happened.

“I wanted to come back to the U.K. and be present in court to confront my accusers and to also show the judges that there was a human being being impacted by all of this, it was not just another initial,” he recounts.

He was wary of taking a direct flight to the U.K, aware that if he was refused entry he would be deported back to Turkey, where he would face imprisonment for up to two years. “I knew enough about Turkey to understand how poor conditions in Turkish prisons were.”

Instead, he took the first flight going to Europe, where he landed in Germany, without issue. He made his way to Calais, a French port town so close that the English coast is visible on a clear day. He passed through security with ease.

When he crossed over to the British side of the ferry port to travel to the U.K., he handed over his passport and paperwork to the immigration officer, who refused to let him pass.

“The immigration officer said I had ‘insufficient ID’ and that I was a Bangladeshi attempting to enter the U.K. illegally,” says N3. “ I couldn’t believe it.”

Designated as not being a British citizen, N3 was handed over to French immigration officials. While he was detained in France, the U.K. Court of Appeals ruled in favor of the Home Office on a technicality, finding that the SIAC had wrongly placed the burden of proof on the government to show that N3 had not been made stateless, rather than upon N3 himself to prove he had. For N3, it felt as if his citizenship had been rescinded a second time.

He was held in a deportation center while French authorities looked to deport him to Bangladesh. When N3 sought asylum in France, authorities put a hold on his deportation order while his application was considered and released him under house arrest in a town 2.5 miles from Lance, isolated among a network of motorways, with not even animals in sight. In November of 2020, he was suddenly arrested again due to what he was told were COVID-19 policies. He was held in prison for nearly 2 weeks before being released back to house arrest.

He was made to walk six miles a day to sign in at a police station and was denied medical treatment when he contracted COVID-19 at the peak of the pandemic. He struggled with being isolated from his family.

“Despite being so close to your family in the U.K., you are so far away and still separated from them. It gives you a bit of freedom but in reality you are imprisoned.”

It was not until April 20, 2021 that things turned around for N3. The U.K. Home Secretary, Priti Patel, withdrew the decision to deprive N3 of his citizenship, after three other SIAC appeals by citizens with Bangladeshi heritage were won. Although N3 was able to return to the U.K., most victims of citizenship deprivation are unsuccessful in their appeals,

Soon after, N3 was given notice by the deportation center to pack his things. The next morning, he was handed over to British police to be taken to the U.K.

He was taken to Southwark police station in London, where he was held under the Terrorism Act. For the first time, he was interrogated about the allegations that had led to his exile of almost four years.

At one point, he was shown a picture that the police claimed was a military camp, which he says was a picture from a vacation in Turkey. “Imagine this would be used as ‘secret evidence’. How could you defend yourself against this?” he says.

He says that his ex-wife’s house was searched by police, who seized all electronic devices, including the one used by his kids to do homework and watch cartoons. Social Services got involved, wanting to assess whether the children were at risk of radicalisation from N3, he was told. “It was such a joke,” he says, “ It was like they were desperate to stick something on me.”

N3 was released from custody after two weeks without any charges. Eventually, Social Services concluded there was no risk and closed their investigation, he says.

“N3’s case is exceptional in that he’s one of the very few who have successfully overturned his citizenship deprivation,” says Rabbani.

Now, he is home again, relieved, but starting over in many ways. “I have to begin from scratch again,” says N3. “Everything has been erased.” He is unable to return to the charity sector, which he devoted most of his life to. He missed out on a lot of the moments that define fatherhood: playing football in the park, providing for them, talking to them about their days. “My daughter who I left as a little child was now a young woman.”

He is left with the trauma and betrayal of an ordeal that he says “was intended to cause maximum suffering.” He suffered from short term memory loss, and still finds it difficult to sleep.

“While growing up our parents would tell us that one day we may be kicked out of this country,” says N3. This distrust is not surprising, since a number of first and second generation South Asians in the U.K. have been subjected to racism and xenophobia in many forms. “To be honest I never felt that way, I felt Britain was my country,” says N3. “Now I feel like a second class citizen, and what my dad said is true now. Now it seems all that racism is coming back in a different institutional form.”

The Biden Administration ordered an additional 3,000 soldiers to central Europe, following intelligence warnings that the Russian military could invade Ukraine at any time.

The deployment is part of a realignment of American firepower on the European continent amid looming fears of widespread war, according to a senior Defense Department official. Over the last two weeks, President Joe Biden has moved troops, naval ships and warplanes into eastern Europe in reaction to Russian President Vladimir Putin’s military escalation.

In a show of force not seen since the Cold War, Russia has positioned more than 100,000 troops in several countries along Ukraine’s borders. The Biden Administration had initially pursued diplomacy in hopes of resolving the deteriorating situation. But the lack of progress, and the continued build-up of Russian forces, has prompted the U.S. to draw up more aggressive strategies to deter Putin.

The decision to deploy 3,000 paratroopers from the 82nd Airborne Division into Poland is the latest move by the White House to demonstrate solidarity with North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) allies concerned over Russia’s massing combat power. On Feb. 2, Biden ordered an Army Stryker squadron consisting of 1,000 troops to move from Germany into Romania. The same day he ordered 2,000 soldiers from the 82nd Airborne Division and 300 troops from 18th Airborne Corps to Poland. Romania and Poland are NATO members that border Ukraine to the south and west, respectively, and they are bracing for refugee flows and potential frontier security issues should Moscow invade from the north and east.

The U.S. forces are not being sent to Ukraine, which is not a NATO member, nor will they take part in any combat roles in the event of a Russian invasion of the country, the U.S. has said. Rather the U.S. forces will serve as reinforcements to reassure U.S. allies and deter further aggression from Moscow, Washington says.

White House National Security Adviser Jake Sullivan said Friday the U.S. believes a Russian military incursion into Ukraine could be imminent, and said any campaign would begin with an aerial bombardment followed by a ground invasion that would imperil escape routes. “Any Americans in Ukraine should leave as soon as possible, and in any event, in the next 24 to 48 hours,” he said. “If you stay, you are assuming risk, with no guarantee that there will be any other opportunity to leave and no prospect of a U.S. military evacuation in the event of a Russian invasion.”

Sullivan said the U.S. was not certain whether Putin had made a decision to invade, but that it could happen at a moment’s notice, even during the Beijing Olympics, which ends Feb. 20. The Ukrainian government, in contrast, has urged calm, saying there is no reason to panic in the face of U.S. intelligence warnings that an invasion is impending. Putin has maintained all along that he has no plans to move on Ukraine, but he has voiced concerns over NATO’s military expansion along its borders in recent decades.


Lon Tweeten/TIME
Russia this week began naval drills in the Black Sea and joint military exercises in neighboring Belarus. The forces represent a fraction of the build-up of Russian troops, tanks and artillery that now surround Ukraine. The White House said Biden had a rare multilateral call Friday with the leaders of France, Germany, Italy, Britain, Canada, NATO, the European Union, Poland and Romania.

The White House and European allies have scrambled for months to respond since Russia began moving forces along the border. Putin has tried to use the deployment as leverage against the U.S. to reduce troops, weapons and influence in central and eastern Europe. The U.S. and Russia have talked on several occasions in an attempt to resolve the crisis diplomatically but have yet to narrow their differences. In recent days, Putin has insisted “the principal Russian concerns turned out to be ignored” by the U.S. and NATO nations.

The White House has warned Putin that the U.S. and allies will enact a sweeping package of sanctions designed to cripple Russia’s economy rather than take military action against it if it invades Ukraine. There are about 200 U.S. troops currently in Ukraine, where members of the Florida National Guard have been training forces in the western part of the country far from the areas controlled by pro-Russia separatists in the east. The U.S. now has more than 80,000 troops on the continent.

Read More: The Untold Story of the Ukraine Crisis

The Pentagon has alerted more than 8,500 U.S. service members for possible deployment to bolster NATO allies’ defenses, but not for a fighting role. After the chaotic withdrawal from Afghanistan, Biden has made clear that he has no plans to send combat troops into Ukraine, though he’s sent more than $600 million of security assistance to its government over the past year.

Unlike in Afghanistan, there are no plans for a U.S. military-led effort to evacuate U.S. citizens from Ukraine if Russia invades, Sullivan said, which is why Americans should leave straightaway. “We don’t know what’s going to happen,” Sullivan said. “But the risk is now high enough, and the threat is now immediate enough, that this is what prudence demands.”
Just before I became Supreme Allied Commander at NATO in 2009, Russian President Vladimir Putin invaded Georgia, a small, democratic, former Soviet Republic in the Caucuses. He used a trumped up “incident” and crushed his tiny neighbor, a country with only 3 million citizens. Russia then essentially annexed two small parts of Georgia, South Ossetia and Abkhazia by encouraging them to declare “independence” and then coming to their protection.

In 2014, just after I completed four years at NATO, he did it again, this time invading a much larger neighbor, Ukraine, and annexing Crimea. That invasion has led to over 14,000 deaths (and counting) and a virulent insurgency against the Ukrainian government in the Donbas region of southeast Ukraine.

Now, essentially completing the invader’s hat trick, he has attacked a neighbor for the third time, and has again used the “independence” route to cobble up a rationale for the invasion. The break-away “republics” of Luhansk and Donetsk are now recognized by Russia, and “peacekeepers” in the form of Russian troops have again invaded a sovereign neighbor.

Ian Fleming, the author of the James Bond novels, said once that when someone shoots at you, the first time may be happenstance, the second time coincidence, but the third time is enemy action. It is time for the West to see Putin for what he is: a serial violator of national borders who wants to unwind the international order and restore what he can of the old Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.

What can the west do to stop him? How do we tear up the Putin playbook?

First and most simply, the U.S. and the democratic nations globally must shine a light on the actions of this rogue regime. If a burglar is approaching the house, light up the terrain surrounding it. The Biden Administration has done this well, utilizing massive dumps of intelligence and data, staying a step ahead of the Russians in terms of revealing their plans.

Read More: What Putin’s Moves Towards War in Ukraine Reveal

Next, and equally simply, the world’s democracies must sanction Putin’s Russia across the spectrum of economic activity: disconnection from the SWIFT system, a ban on dealing with every significant sector of the Russian economy, personal sanctions on high ranking government officials, senior military, and especially the oligarch class. These sanctions should include banning international travel to any democratic country. Let them move their yachts from Monte Carlo to a nice slip in the Bander Abas Yacht Club in Iran. There should be nothing but air whistling through the Nord Stream 2 pipeline for the foreseeable future, and the Germans are stepping up to ensure that is the case.

A third action would be increasing military aid to the Ukrainians. I know their military well, and their soldiers deployed on NATO missions under my command. They are brave and professional, and will fight—especially with their families and neighbors behind them and the Russians ahead of them. There is still time to move significant levels of material (notably anti-air and anti-armor systems) into Ukrainian hands—ship it to L’viv in the far west, which Putin is unlikely to seriously threaten given the vast size of Ukraine.

Prepare for the worst case scenarios: the fall of Kyiv and the overthrow of the democratically elected government of Ukraine. This means having an evacuation plan for President Zelensky and his team; a preset fallback position (initially L’viv and then perhaps back further to a NATO capital, say Warsaw or London); construct a rudimentary command and control network to run a credible resistance in the Ukrainian dominated portions of the country; and provide financial support to keep the current Ukrainian embassies and the network of ambassadors at the U.N. and other international organizations functional. Much as Charles de Gaulle continued to carry the flame of France during the Nazi occupation, Ukraine should be afforded a similar opportunity.

Outside of the borders of Ukraine, show Putin the steel and determination of NATO. While the alliance isn’t going to go to war in Ukraine, it must strengthen our defenses in the east. Activate the NATO Response Force and deploy it into nations on the Ukrainian and Russian borders; increase the level of intelligence gathered and shared across the alliance; conduct a new round of border defense exercises; deploy NATO’s Standing Naval Task Force into the Black Sea; and aggressively conduct air policing around the borders of the Alliance, especially in the Arctic which Putin values greatly. And it would be a good time to quietly encourage Finland and Sweden—both of whom have powerful, professional, and capable militaries—to join the alliance.

Finally, there is a strong case to be made that the battlefield may shift to cyber. Moving tanks, jet fighters, and armored personnel carriers full of troops is expensive, and Putin’s financial reserves, while significant, are not unlimited. But electrons are a “free good” in terms of costs, and he may choose to attack Ukraine directly (especially its electric grid) or even conduct a horizontal escalation against the U.S. and NATO. The U.S. and our partners in cyber must be ready to “go offensive” to stop Putin. This may end up being the most dangerous part of the conflict.

The Putin playbook is actually pretty tired and utterly obvious at this point. We know what we need to do, and even with the risk of escalation, we need to muster the will to stop Putin from simply annexing the rest of Ukraine—he will not stop unless he faces real consequences.
The U.S. Treasury Department imposed sanctions on the Belarusian regime’ defense sector and financial institutions Thursday following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, citing Minsk’s “support for, and facilitation of” Moscow’s attack.

Among the 24 individuals and entities facing these sanctions are Belarusian defense minister Viktor Khrenin, two large state-owned banks, several security companies that the U.S. says have close links with Russia, and a businessman linked to authoritarian President Alexander Lukashenko.

“Having already sacrificed its legitimacy to suppress the democratic aspirations of the Belarusian people, the Lukashenko regime is now jeopardizing Belarus’ sovereignty by supporting Russia’s further invasion of Ukraine,” said U.S. treasury minister Janet Yellen.

Read More: Here’s What We Know So Far About Russia’s Assault on Ukraine

The U.S. isn’t the only country sanctioning these institutions and individuals. British Prime Minister Boris Johnson announced similar punitive measures for Belarus’ reported role in the assault.

As tensions between Moscow and Kyiv escalated last week, some 30,000 Russian troops extended their stay in Belarus. For months, the U.S. has been warning that Russia is creating pretexts to swoop on Kyiv, and flagged that the recent war games and this extension in Belarus was a prelude to the attack on Ukraine, which was ultimately launched Thursday.

Lukashenko has denied the involvement of Belarusian troops in Moscow’s attack, although he said he was willing to support Russian forces if necessary, state media reported. But with reports of Russian troops entering Ukraine from its northern border, the Belarusian regime’s role in the emerging conflict in Europe has come under increased scrutiny.

“I think the most alarming thing we now understand is that we’re not quite sure whether Belarus could be considered as a sovereign state in terms of control on its own territory, especially in terms of military control,” says Olga Dryndova, editor of Belarus-Analysen at the University of Bremen’s Research Center for East European Studies in Germany.

CCTV cameras at Belarusian-Ukrainian checkpoint Senkovka-Veselovka captures a convoy crossing the border from Belarus to Ukraine on Feb. 24 (State Border Guard Service of Ukraine/EYEPRESS/Reuters)
CCTV cameras at Belarusian-Ukrainian checkpoint Senkovka-Veselovka captures a convoy crossing the border from Belarus to Ukraine on Feb. 24 State Border Guard Service of Ukraine/EYEPRESS/Reuters
The relationship between Russia and Belarus
Both Russia and Belarus belonged to the former Soviet Union. These days, Russia is also Belarus’ key trade partner. Bilateral trading between the countries was $29.5 billion in 2020, according to government data. The two nations also hold regular military drills together, with the most recent one on Feb.10 near Belarus’ southern border with Ukraine.

Read More: In the Standoff Between Belarus and Europe, Migrants Are Being Used as Human Weapons

The Kremlin has long urged for the better implementation of a 1999 treaty between Russia and Belarus. In the treaty, the two countries vowed to form a union similar to that of the European Union, promising broad cooperation but also maintaining their independence. Lukashenko reportedly hoped that in signing the treaty, he would be chosen to replace outgoing Russian President Boris Yeltsin—who was sick at the time. However, the presidency went to Vladimir Putin, and the treaty was never fully implemented.

Lukashenko went on to rebuff several proposals from Moscow for deeper integration of the two countries. The hotly contested 2020 Belarusian elections changed that. Lukashenko claimed to have won a sixth term by a landslide, despite claims of electoral fraud and widespread vote-rigging. Minsk has since warmed up to Moscow—especially after Putin recognized Lukashenko’s victory in the polls and offered to provide security aid if massive electoral protests in the country worsened.

Dryndova believes that Lukashenko was able to stay in power in Belarus because of Russia’s show of support. “I don’t see how possible it was for him to stay in power without the support of Putin,” she says. But it came at a price. “That’s also the tragedy of the protests of 2020—that they made [Lukashenko] so weak that he is now not able to ask Putin to move his tanks out of the territory.”

Read More: Russia’s Invasion of Ukraine Is a Major Test for Joe Biden’s Foreign Policy Vision

Ihar Tyshkevich, an expert on Belarus from the Ukrainian Institute of the Future in Kyiv, says Lukashenko has no power to oppose Russia from stationing its troops in Belarus, and has nothing to gain from letting Moscow use Minsk territory.

“Lukashenko cannot benefit from Russian aggression in Ukraine,” Tyshkevich says. “But he has no choice.”

Russian vehicles, aircraft & soldiers are spotted in cities & towns - Minsk, Brest, Homiel, Mozyr, Babruisk, Pinsk, all over southern Belarus. Lukashenka committed high treason by supporting Russia in the assault on Ukraine. He is a war criminal & shares responsibility with Putin pic.twitter.com/Db1nI8Pclk

— Franak Viačorka (@franakviacorka) February 25, 2022
What does Belarus stand to lose?
By allowing Russian troops to enter Ukraine from the northern border, Lukashenko has effectively surrendered the sovereignty of Belarus, according to Jörg Forbrig, Director for Central and Eastern Europe of the German Marshall Fund.

“By now, his country is basically part of the Russian military space,” Forbrig says. “It is a staging ground for the Russian army.”

Belarusian authorities have called Ukraine an “important trading partner,” but that relationship will likely also be severely impacted by the latest developments, says Forbrig. A large part of that trade is oil: In 2019, around half of Belarus’ $4.14 billion in exports to Ukraine is refined petroleum products. Another major export from Belarus to Ukraine is electricity. Belarusian state media previously forecast electricity exports to Ukraine could rise as high as 1.2 billion kilowatt-hours in 2021. That relationship is set to end now, after Ukraine said it would suspend imports of its electricity from Belarus in response to the crisis.

Ukrainian border guard officers patrol the Ukrainian-Belarusian state border at a checkpoint in Novi Yarylovychi, Ukraine, on Feb. 21 (Oleksandr Ratushniak—AP)
Ukrainian border guard officers patrol the Ukrainian-Belarusian state border at a checkpoint in Novi Yarylovychi, Ukraine, on Feb. 21 Oleksandr Ratushniak—AP
Strengthened ties between Minsk and Moscow also signify Russia’s growing counter-response to the NATO alliance, which Ukraine has expressed interest in joining. The Kremlin’s ability to station troops in Belarus puts pressure on NATO powers to respond to the precarious defense and security situation in the region, Forbrig says. Three of Belarus’ neighboring states are members of NATO—Latvia, Lithuania and Poland—and other member-states in the region are already on high-alert due to the Ukraine crisis. Lukashenko had offered to host Russian nuclear weapons in the country if NATO were to move American nuclear bombs from Germany to Eastern Europe. His regime can soon host the weapons in Belarus after it renounced “non-nuclear” status in a constitutional referendum that claimed to have the approval of majority of voters—made possible by a brutal crackdown on opponents following a 2020 election that was widely criticized as neither free nor fair.

Read More: How NATO Is Responding to Russia’s Invasion of Ukraine

And though Lukashenko has ruled Belarus for 28 years, that may not last. As an autocracy, Belarus has little to no reliable data on Lukashenko’s popularity, but one 2020 poll before the Aug. 9 elections and the protests that followed showed Lukashenko’s approval rating at 24%. Thousands of protesters claimed that the election results were rigged.

“The bigger question at some stage is whether or not Lukashenko at some stage becomes dispensable to Moscow,” says Forbrig, noting that the Belarusian leader’s power is effectively sponsored by Putin. “They may find at some stage that installing a different ruler in Belarus will be beneficial for them.”
Members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) have met Russia’s invasion of Ukraine with outrage, deploying thousands of troops to Eastern Europe to protect their alliance members.

But while Russian forces launched a violent assault on Ukraine Thursday morning, NATO countries will not engage in warfare against Russia unless a member nation is attacked.

The decision to stay out of the conflict in Ukraine comes at a fraught time for NATO, as Ukraine has expressed a desire to join the military alliance but remains shut out in large part because of Russia’s fierce opposition to more eastward NATO expansion. So far, Russia’s wide-ranging attack on its neighbor country has been confined to Ukraine’s borders, hitting cities and bases with airstrikes or shelling, but several nearby NATO countries are on high alert and have formally asked other members to discuss whether the alliance should take collective action.

Here’s what you need to know about NATO’s role in the escalating tensions in Eastern Europe.

What was NATO’s response to Russia’s attack?
NATO Secretary-General Jens Stoltenberg called Russia’s moves “a brutal act of war” and affirmed Thursday morning that the military alliance would defend “every inch” of its territory should Russia attack a member country—an outcome military experts say is unlikely.

Despite the ongoing warfare and mounting casualties, NATO will not send any troops to Ukraine, instead bolstering its own eastern flank.

“We do not have any plans [to deploy] NATO troops to Ukraine,” Stoltenberg said at a press briefing on Feb. 24. “We have already increased and we are increasing the presence of NATO troops in the eastern part of the alliance on NATO territory.”

Hours after NATO announced its plans, U.S. President Joe Biden also confirmed he will not send any forces into Ukraine. The U.S. has about 90,000 troops already stationed in Europe, most of which are based in Germany, and will deploy an additional 7,000 troops to Germany this week.

“If [Russian President Vladimir Putin] did move into NATO countries, we will be involved,” Biden said Thursday afternoon. “The good news is NATO is more united and more determined than ever.”

But as Russian troops advanced in their invasion of Ukraine overnight, NATO announced on Feb. 25 that, for the first time in history, it would deploy parts of its combat-ready response force to Eastern Europe as a precautionary measure. NATO will continue to send weapons to Ukraine, including air defense, though it did not commit to sending troops to the nation.


Lon Tweeten
Why isn’t Ukraine in NATO?
Several of Ukraine’s neighboring countries that were part of the Soviet Union have joined NATO in recent years. But deepening conflict between Ukraine and Russia has complicated Ukraine’s own wish to be included in the alliance.

In 2008, NATO announced that Ukraine and Georgia would become members if they met a series of criteria, such as the alliance’s standards for governance and transparency. Joining NATO became a top priority for Ukraine, but the nation’s bid for membership has made little progress. Some NATO members have cited Ukraine’s history of corruption as a source for the delay, while others say its transition to democracy in the mid-1990s is still shaky. Other NATO members are afraid that Russia will react aggressively if Ukraine joins the alliance.

Ukraine’s ambassador to Britain told BBC that the nation’s ambition to join NATO was met with threats and blackmail by Russia. But in 2019, Ukraine amended its constitution to include its goal of obtaining full membership in NATO, so the push will likely continue.

Although NATO hasn’t taken in Ukraine, it has helped defend the nation against Russian aggression before. In 2014, when Russia annexed Crimea and invaded eastern Ukraine, NATO responded by suspending cooperation with Russia and boosting Kyiv’s defensive capabilities. It held military trainings, deployed troops to the region, and funded cyberwarfare protections. But it did not join the fight militarily.

“We are told the door is open,” Ukraine President Volodymyr Zelensky said last week about the prospect of joining NATO. “But for now, no outsiders are allowed in.”

What are Articles 4 and 5?
Although experts say an attack on NATO countries is currently unlikely, several member nations have called for security consultations to be held under Article 4 of the NATO treaty. Article 4 states that countries “will consult together whenever, in the opinion of any of them, the territorial integrity, political independence or security of any of the Parties is threatened.”

Consultation under Article 4 does not guarantee that any action will be taken, but it allows for swift talks. It has been invoked six times since the alliance was formed in 1949, most recently by Turkey in Feb. 2020, after dozens of Turkish soldiers were killed by Syrian government forces in opposition-held areas of north-western Syria.

At that time, member countries did not invoke Article 5, which outlines the alliance’s declaration that an attack against one member nation is considered an attack against all. Invoking Article 5 would mean all NATO countries vow to come together—most likely in warfare—if one member is attacked. It has only been invoked once, after the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks. Invoking Article 5 would be a significant step representing a more concrete plan of action, even though NATO has already informally suggested it would defend its members if attacked.

“We will continue to do whatever is necessary to shield the alliance from aggression,” Stoltenberg said. “Our collective defense commitment [under] Article 5 is ironclad.”

What is Russia’s stance on NATO?
Russia’s ambivalence towards NATO expansion stems largely from post-Cold War tension between the West and Russia.

Created in 1949 as a bulwark against the former Soviet Union, NATO has since grown to 30 countries—many of which were part of the Soviet Union or its satellites. Although that bloc no longer exists, NATO’s growth across Europe and its expansion eastward is seen by Russia as a threat to its national security.

In essence, Russia believes NATO’s primary aim is to make Russia weaker. It views any expansion of NATO as a direct threat to its own interests, and Ukrainian membership would likely mean that the country is brought further from Russia’s sphere of influence. Putin claimed in 2005 that the “collapse of the Soviet Union was a major geopolitical disaster of the century.”

“As for the Russian nation, it became a genuine drama,” he said at an annual address to the Federal Assembly of the Russian Federation. “Tens of millions of our co-citizens and compatriots found themselves outside Russian territory. Moreover, the epidemic of disintegration infected Russia itself.”
The prospect of warmer weather is brightening spirits throughout Germany after another tough winter—and nobody is more eager for spring than Olaf Scholz. Germany’s chancellor knows that prolonged cold weather means high demand for natural gas, which heats half the households and supplies a quarter of the energy needs in Europe’s biggest economy. But these days, Scholz would rather not be reminded of the source of more than half that gas: Russia.

Putin’s invasion of Ukraine, and Western sanctions on Moscow, mean that Germany needs to find alternative sources of supply. Analysts say that could take two to three years. In the meantime, political parties are scrambling to compensate for a series of strategic missteps that have enabled Putin to have Germany in his grip—as business magazine Wirtschaftswoche puts it—”like a dealer controls a junkie.”

Much of the blame must fall to former chancellor Angela Merkel’s Christian Democratic Union (CDU), which oversaw the dismantling of Germany’s nuclear power apparatus in the wake of the Fukushima disaster in 2011. It also dragged its heels on renewable energy, failed to ensure that the country had strategic reserves on hand, and neglected to provide for alternative sources in the case of disruption to the Russian supply.

Read More: The Vital Missing Link in the Sanctions Against Russia

“During Merkel’s chancellorship, codependency was seen as a way of ensuring geopolitical stability,” says Veronica Grimm, an energy economist at the Friedrich-Alexander-Universität in Erlangen-Nürnberg. “But we’re increasingly transitioning from a rules-based to a power-based world order. We were not well prepared for this.”

At the same time, it will be hard for Germany’s other political parties to capitalize on the CDU’s blunder, given their own exposure to the crisis. Scholz and his Social Democrat Party (SPD) have long been one of the main proponents of Nord Stream 2, the controversial pipeline that was intended to ensure an additional supply of Russian gas.

Crucially, the pipeline bypassed Ukraine, which critics saw as a way of reducing Kyiv’s leverage over Moscow. Washington also voiced fears that the project would increase Europe’s energy dependence on Russia and threatened sanctions on the company behind it in September 2020. But Scholz, as finance minister, led negotiations to save Nord Stream 2. To pacify the Biden administration, he offered up to a billion euros to construct two LNG terminals for the import of gas from the U.S. and other sources. Construction of those terminals stalled after objections from environmentalists, though Scholz recently announced plans to revive the terminals.

Scholz must also grapple with his party’s Russia-friendly image. The construction of the first gas pipeline from Russia took place in 1973, under the watch of an SPD chancellor, Willi Brandt, who pursued conciliatory trade and other policies with the communist bloc. Former SPD chancellor Gerhard Schröder is meanwhile on friendly terms with Putin and earns hundreds of thousands of euros a year as a board member of Russian gas companies Gazprom and Rosnet. It was only after the Feb. 24 invasion of Ukraine that the SPD called on Schröder to cut those ties. (In the meantime, Schröderisieung has entered the German media lexicon to refer to a process of creeping corruption and old politicians hanging to power.)

Read More: Europe’s Illusion of Peace Has Been Shattered

Other parties are being criticized, too. The Greens face attack over their long advocacy of demilitarization. The Free Democratic Party, a minor partner in the current governing coalition, has drawn flak for its hesitancy over imposing tough economic sanctions on Moscow. Indeed, despite the political posturing of the last few days, “all the parties have shied away from the cost of tougher sanctions for too long,” says Grimm. She calls the position “short sighted” given the enormous consequences if the war should escalate. “The question should be, what sanctions package can prevent a further escalation?”

Beyond the immediate question of sanctions, however, Germany faces a more general challenge of reorienting itself away from the rules-based order that Putin brushed aside in his invasion of Ukraine and towards a new global order, in which it seems inevitable that military might will play a bigger role. But as the E.U. rolls out increasingly aggressive sanctions and Germany sets about bolstering its military, it seems that the country‘s leaders are still scrambling to compensate for old mistakes instead of charting a course to the future. For Chancellor Scholz, springtime is still a long way off.

Language defines reality. Language defines who is a “real” person, and who isn’t. He who controls language controls life and death.

That was the conclusion of the literature professor Viktor Klemperer, as he tried to make sense of Nazi propaganda in the 1930s and 40s. As a German Jew in Dresden, Klemperer lost his home, his academic position, his health. But he kept his life, thanks to being married to a non-Jew. He spent the war doing odd jobs in factories, being interrogated and beaten by the Gestapo, and keeping a diary where he tried to figure out how ordinary, pleasant Germans became spellbound by Nazi propaganda.

At the centre of its power, he concluded, was how the Nazis developed a certain language, which he called Lingua Tretii Imperia, or LTI. LTI defined new in-groups and out-groups. When the Nazis came to power Propaganda Minister Goebbels claimed grandly that “the individual will be replaced by the Community of the People”—Die Volkskommune, populated by Volksgenosse driving Volkswagens, reading Der Volkischer Beobachter listening to Volksempfanger. Anyone outside the Volk weren’t ‘real people’, and were underserving of rights or even life. Furthermore, when the Nazis defined the world in terms of “Ubermensch” (superman) and “Untermensch” (inferior person)—Germans felt they were part of a special caste, unique and valued, while the “Untermenschen” deserved to be wiped out. When the Nazis reinforced this distinction with the concept of being “Aryan,” people got to feel ever more superior, while the Jews were classified as vermin, a blot upon the world that needed to be erased.

Putin and his cronies are using similar linguistic tactics in order to pave the way the destruction of the Ukrainian state—which they frequently define as “not a real country” unlike the “real (for that read mythical) unified people of Russia-Ukraine-Belarus.” Meanwhile patriotic Ukrainians, anyone who doesn’t agree to Russian colonial suzerainty, are dismissed as Nazi: “de-Nazification” is the supposed reason for Putin’s invasion. The charges are obviously absurd: unlike the U.S. and many Western European countries where the far-right are in parliament (and sometimes funded and supported by the Kremlin), Ukraine has a Jewish President, a multi-ethnic cabinet and the far-right don’t even make it into the current legislative chamber.

Read More: Putin’s Attack on Ukraine Is Attempt to Delay His Own Demise

But though ridiculous, Putin’s language is intentional and strategic. He is using the term “Nazi” in exactly the same way the Nazis used “untermensch.” After all who is more despicable than Nazis? Using the term enables the mass murder of civilians with illegal cluster munitions that are already pulverising residential areas. It also paves the way for the repressions that are meant to come with occupation: the Russian “kill lists” of civil society activists and journalists and the mass arrests. After all if you are fighting “Nazis” then every measure is acceptable, the perverse logic goes, it says just look at the lengths the Allies went to in World War II when firebombing German cities (most notably Klemperer’s own Dresden). After World War II the Soviet leadership, which Putin claims to respect, crushed the countries of Eastern Europe by killing many who dared to speak their mind, and carting many more off to the gulag. Putin will likewise need to get rid of any free-thinking people if he is ever to make real his dream of wiping a sovereign Ukraine off the map. His plan is proving faulty—but that is clearly his intent.

As Putin and his propaganda lackeys repeatedly misuse the term “Nazi” this once powerful word becomes drained of meaning, it gets reduced to meaningless sound, and becomes bled of its power as a taboo against the worst behaviour. A word that is meant to contain the memory of all that is horrendous in history loses its power to define the world- and thus makes Putin’s own essence-of-fascism easier to pursue. “You’re behaving like a Nazi” we want to scream at Putin—but he’s already sucked the meaning out of that term in this debate. “Oh no it’s you lot who are Nazis” he taunts back. Instead of a powerful word that acts as a check on evil, all one hears is endless twittering with each side calling the other Nazis until it is rendered meaningless.

Read More: Putin’s Invasion Has Sparked Protests in Russia. Could They Be His Undoing?

Ultimately, however, it’s not audiences in the West who are the targets of Putin’s sadistic word games. His main target is domestic, where the state-dictated cult of World War II is all pervasive. The Language of Putin’s Putative Imperii bellows non-stop from all the Kremlin media, especially on TV, readying the linguistic ground for very real murder. But in between the barking of his propaganda attack dogs, something strange occurs. You will likely see adverts, for western fast food and cosmetics, western tooth paste and western banks. We fund this murder propaganda every day, pouring in advertising dollars. And before the vicious vomitarium of Kremlin political talk shows come the entertainment programs: western reality shows and movies, which help reel the viewers in who then stick around for the politics. All these TV shows run on western editing systems, multi-channel mixing boards and video equipment.

All this can stop. We can undermine the Russian system if Western companies stop empowering the Kremlin with ad money, Western companies stop licensing programs and formats to Russian TV, the companies who provide editing equipment stop providing online updates to their software. This will put a thousand spanners in the workings of the hate machine.

Putin, meanwhile, is attacking Ukrainian media infrastructure. Among his latest missiles attacks on densely populated urban areas was an attempt to bomb the Kyiv public broadcaster. His weapons hit next door Babyn Yar, the site of the Nazi genocide of Kyiv Jews, where 33, 771 were executed in two days in 1941. To that horrific figure we can now add, according to Ukrainian authorities, at least five more innocent civilians. Putin’s metaphorical “denazification” literally, lethally continues in the traditions of the Nazis
Europeans should turn down the thermostat in their homes to help reduce the region’s energy dependence on Russia as relations with Moscow worsen over the invasion of Ukraine, the International Energy Agency (IEA), said Thursday.

The E.U. depends on natural gas for 38% of its heating needs, and 35% of the bloc’s supply of the fuel comes from Russia, flowing through a vast network of pipelines. European leaders are now scrambling to find ways to cut their imports of Russian natural gas, which in 2021 stood at 155 ​​billion cubic meters (bcm). At a launch event attended by E.U. representatives, the IEA—a Paris-based intergovernmental organization set up in the 1970’s to protect Western countries’ energy security—unveiled a 10-point plan to slash that figure by one third by next winter.

The risks of Europe’s reliance on Russian gas have come into sharp relief since Russia’s invasion of Ukraine: energy prices have surged on fears that Russian gas supplies could be constricted by the physical damage to energy infrastructure in Ukraine during the conflict, or that Russia may even cut off flows entirely to European countries. The E.U. and U.S. have also been limited in their ability to sanction Russian energy exports, crucial to the government’s budget, because of fears of triggering shortages or untenable gas prices for European countries.

Reducing consumer use of energy could play a significant role in quickly cutting demand. According to the IEA, the average temperature of buildings in the E.U. is currently above 22°C (71.6°F). “Adjusting the thermostat for buildings[‘] heating would deliver immediate annual energy savings of around 10 bcm for each degree of reduction while also bringing down energy bills,” the agency said.

The agency called on governments to run public awareness campaigns to encourage consumers to reduce their energy use, noting that taking an individual action like this is similar to the donations and refugee outreach that “many European citizens” have already undertaken in response to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine.

France currently holds the E.U. Council’s presidency, and its ecological transition minister, Barbara Pompili, backed the call for citizens to take “simple actions” to limit energy consumption. “In these difficult times, it is vain to believe that a war on [our] continent will have no impact on us,” she said at the IEA’s launch event. “And collective responsibility in the way we use and consume our energy is, by far, the best way to reduce our dependency to Russia.”

Consumers could “turn the heat down a bit” in their house or start work on an insulation retrofit to permanently reduce their energy needs, Pompili said, adding that the latter solution will require E.U. member states to invest billions of euros to pay for energy efficiency improvements.

The IEA’s plan also calls on the E.U. and member states to scale up their imports of natural gas from other producing countries—which include the U.S., Qatar, and Azerbaijan—potentially replacing 30 bcm of Russian imports, and to speed up the deployment of renewable energy sources that the bloc aims to use to replace natural gas in the long run to reduce its greenhouse gas emissions. The IEA says an acceleration of the clean energy roll out could reduce gas demand by 6 BCM in the next year.

The E.U. is planning to unveil its own strategy for reducing reliance on Russian natural gas next week.
Japan’s worst power crisis in over a decade is a culmination of events starting from the Fukushima disaster, and is an issue that the nation won’t be able to quickly shake.

The world’s third-largest economy has been running on a thinner supply of electricity since the triple meltdown at Fukushima in March 2011 shut its massive fleet of nuclear reactors. Market reforms over the next 10 years aimed at boosting security of supply and making the grid cleaner led to utilities retiring inefficient and dirty power plants, crimping resources further.

That set the background for the current scenario. A strong earthquake last week stretched the power grid, and the situation was made worse on Tuesday by a surprise blast of frigid weather across Tokyo. Solar output dropped and there wasn’t enough gas or coal-fired power plants to make up the difference. Now the region’s top utility is scrambling to avoid a blackout in one of the world’s most advanced cities.

The current crisis would have been “much less severe – perhaps almost a non-event – with more of Japan’s nuclear plants online,” said Dan Shulman, the founder of Japan-based consultancy Shulman Advisory, which advises clients on the nation’s electricity market. The impact of the war in Ukraine on fossil fuel prices and an increased dependence on less-reliable renewables could result in more instability on Japan’s grid, he said.

What’s happening in Japan is playing out across other power grids from Texas to Taiwan. The energy transition and natural disasters are throwing new challenges at utilities, stretching grids and triggering blackouts that threaten economies, especially resource-poor and isolated ones like Japan.

With Japan’s grid so stretched, a future earthquake, extreme weather event or fuel supply disruption could trigger another power shortage even after this immediate crisis subsides.

Japan’s issues can be traced to the magnitude 9 earthquake in March 2011, the biggest ever recorded in the country. A massive tsunami overwhelmed the Fukushima Dai-Ichi nuclear facility, shut off power to cooling systems and led to meltdowns of three reactor cores.

In the immediate aftermath, Japan closed all its 54 reactors that supplied about 30% of its electricity needs. Only 10 have restarted under post-Fukushima safety rules due to strong public opposition and a cumbersome regulatory process. Nuclear power now supplies less than 10% of Japan’s electricity. It’s been replaced by a mix of natural gas, coal and solar facilities.

“The voting public has been against nuclear generation post Fukushima so it is a tough problem for government to solve,” said Antony Stace, a Sydney-based energy trader who closely monitors the Japanese market.

The government was well aware of the dilemma, and sped up liberalization of the power market, with the effort culminating in the 2016 reform to break up monopolies held by regional utilities like Tokyo Electric Power Co. The idea was that more companies would enter the power retail market, increase competition, boost security of supply and ultimately lower electricity rates for consumers.

Unforeseen Impact
But there was an unforeseen consequence: In order to gain the upper hand against new competitors, regional utilities were quick to retire backup power plants that were expensive and inefficient as a way to cut costs and provide customers with more attractive power rates. That further tightened available supply, and removed a key piece of emergency infrastructure.

Meanwhile, the biggest competitors to Japan’s regional utilities weren’t so interested in investing in new generation capacity. They were focused on selling retail electricity that they procured either from the spot market or through a purchase agreement with an existing power plant.

Japan had only 142 gigawatts worth of available power capacity before last week’s earthquake, according to data from its electricity exchange. That is 23% lower than in 2016, a few weeks before the market liberalization. Oil-fired power capacity—the most expensive of the fossil fuels—dropped by 73% over the same period.

Meanwhile, Japan introduced a feed-in tariff program in 2012 that boosted installations of solar panels. While wildly successful, it also crowded the nation’s grid with intermittent power output, making it difficult—and sometimes not very cost effective—to replace retiring thermal power plants.

So when last week’s earthquake hit and knocked offline 12 power plants, Japan had little spare capacity to call upon. The sudden cold blast boosted demand but reduced solar output, forcing the nation’s top utility to ask businesses and households to lower consumption.

Recurring Crisis
Relief may not come soon. Several coal-fired power plants could remain offline for months, since machinery to load the fuel into the facilities was damaged, according to people with knowledge of the matter. That means Japan will need to purchase spot liquefied natural gas, which isn’t an easy task given that the fuel is facing a global supply shortage.

The longer-term view doesn’t look much better. Japan’s effort to drastically reduce dependence on fossil fuels will leave a gap that renewables can’t easily fill for years. The government last year said it aims for renewable energy to make up a third of the nation’s power generation by 2030, up from its previous target of less than a quarter. Meanwhile, the revised plan cuts gas- and coal-fired power generation by roughly half by the end of the decade.

The plan also requires Japan to restart basically all of its 33 operable nuclear reactors—a difficult task given the public opposition. Only 10 units have so far resumed. All of this makes it more likely that this week’s crisis could be repeated with the next hiccup.

“Many power plants in the country have been closing,” said Go Matsuo, head of Energy Economics and Society Research Institute in Tokyo. “There needs to be a fundamental shift in how to encourage investment in the area. Investment in large-scale power generation takes seven to eight years to decide, so that means there is an urgency.”
To Vladimir Putin, Orthodox Christianity is a tool for asserting Moscow’s rights over sovereign Ukraine. In his February televised address announcing the recent invasion of Ukraine, he argued the inhabitants of that “ancient Russian land” were Orthodox from time immemorial, and now faced persecution from an illegitimate regime in Kyiv.

Led by Patriarch Kirill, the Russian Orthodox Church is one of the most tangible cultural bonds between Russia and Ukraine. The gilded domes of Kyiv’s Monastery of the Caves and St. Sophia Cathedral have beckoned pilgrims from across both lands for nigh on a thousand years.

With religious rhetoric, Putin taps into a long tradition that imagines a Greater Russia extending across present-day Ukraine and Belarus, in a combined territory known as Holy Rus’. Nostalgic for empire, this sees the spiritual unity of the three nations as key to Russia’s earthly power as an exceptional civilization. Encouraged by Putin’s “special operation,” Russian Orthodox nationalists are excitedly recalling the prophecy of a twentieth-century saint from Chernihiv, now one of Ukraine’s beleaguered cities. “Just as the One Lord God is the indivisible Holy Trinity of Father, Son, and Holy Spirit,” this monk fortold, “so Russia, Ukraine, and Belarus together are Holy Rus’ and cannot be separated.”

Putin is not the first modern Moscow ruler to co-opt this idea in seeking to consolidate secular power. During the darkest hours of World War Two, Stalin reinstated the Russian Orthodox Church—having almost bled it dry—and replaced the communist Internationale with a new national anthem. Its lyrics asserted that the Soviet Union was “unbreakable, welded together forever by Great Rus’.”

Around 2007 the Kremlin further advanced the allied concept of Russky Mir, or the Russian World, initially a soft power project aimed at promoting Russian culture worldwide and likened by Patriarch Kirill to the British Commonwealth. Putin, however—unsettled by mass protests against his authoritarian regime in 2011-12 as well as those that toppled his vassal in Ukraine in 2013-14—has since twisted both Holy Rus’ and the Russian World to serve a more violent agenda.

Outsized emphasis now goes to Russia’s tradition of warrior saints. It was by remarkable coincidence, Putin told thousands of flag-waving supporters at a recent Moscow stadium rally, that the military operation in Ukraine commenced on the birthday of Saint Theodore Ushakov, an eighteenth-century Russian naval commander famed for never losing a single battle. “He once said, ‘This threat will serve to glorify Russia,’” Putin enthused. “That was the case then, is now, and ever shall be!”

Cast aside is an alternative Christian holy tradition of defiant passive resistance, exemplified by the first saints to be canonized in medieval Rus’, the Kyiv princes Boris and Gleb, who accepted martyrdom at the hands of their brother. “They gave up without a fight,” Putin once remarked in disgust. “This cannot be an example for us.” With the attack on Kyiv’s current ruler, even small acts of Christian pacifism by Russians are quashed. A remote village priest was fined hundreds of dollars for publicly refusing to support the war and thus “call black—white, evil—good.” A young woman was detained outside Moscow’s main Orthodox cathedral for holding up a simple sign bearing the biblical commandment, “Thou shallt not kill.”

Read More: Russia’s Problems Go Much Deeper Than Putin

In this Putin can count on the backing of a body of jingoistic opinion now dominating the Church hierarchy. Flanked by medal-laden Defense Minister Shoigu at the 2020 consecration of a cavernous black and green military cathedral, Patriarch Kirill prayed that Russia’s armed forces would never suffer defeat. This March, on the very same spot where Pussy Riot made their infamous protest against cozy Church-Kremlin ties a decade ago, the Patriarch presented an icon to the head of Russia’s National Guard—the same unit now reportedly suffering heavy losses in Ukraine—in the hope that this would “inspire new recruits taking their oath.”

Kirill is not an outlier in his support for the war, as no senior cleric inside Russia has expressed dissent. “Everything the president does is right,” one archbishop told local news agency Regnum in late March. “Speaking as a monarchist, I would personally place a crown upon Putin’s head if God granted the opportunity.” Similar fervor is found among respected Moscow parish priests. “Russian peacekeepers are conducting a special operation in order to hold Nuremberg trials against the whole of Europe,” one preached during a recent sermon, as he denied reports of civilian casualties. “What is the West able to produce? Only ISIS and neofascism.”

A cross and a dome of destroyed by shelling russian army of orthodox church in the recaptured by the Ukrainian army Hostomel city in Kyiv area, Ukraine, 06 April 2022 (Maxym Marusenko-NurPhoto)
A cross and a dome of destroyed by shelling russian army of orthodox church in the recaptured by the Ukrainian army Hostomel city in Kyiv area, Ukraine, 06 April 2022 Maxym Marusenko-NurPhoto
This priest concluded his sermon with the hope that Kazakhstan, Moldova, and Georgia would be reunited with Russia, in addition to Ukraine. But if Putin is looking to burnish his legacy as gatherer of historical Russian lands, there is a problem. The inhabitants of Ukraine are not interested in being “liberated” by his operation to “de-Nazify” their country. “The Russian World has arrived!” one woman shouted sarcastically as she filmed invading troops facing off against a crowd of angry locals just 20 miles from Ukraine’s eastern border with Russia. “We are not waiting for you, so get out of here!” Within hours of the first missile strikes on February 24, even the the Orthodox Church in Ukraine that is under the Patriarch of Moscow turned indignantly to Putin. “We ask that you stop this fratricidal war immediately,” Metropolitan Onuphry implored. “Such a war has justification before neither God nor man.”

Putin’s is thus a spiritual, as well as military, misadventure. Similar to Stalin’s pivot at the lowest point in World War Two, his reliance upon the Orthodox Church over the last decade smacks of desperation. It hardly stems from personal commitment to the faith: while projected as a believer from the beginning of his presidency, for more than a decade Putin largely rebuffed the Church’s policy goals—such as mandatory classes on Orthodoxy in public schools—until his need for autocratic symbolism prevailed after his return to the presidency in 2011-12. Throughout his rule he has consistently spoken and behaved at odds with normative Orthodox Christian behavior, such as by claiming that choice of faith is unimportant since all religious categories are human invention, or when awkwardly greeting Patriarch Kirill with the gestures reserved for venerating a sacred relic or icon.

Bellicose rhetoric from Orthodox clerics does resonate with some devout Russians, but this is a narrow swath of the population. While a 2019 national poll found that over 60 percent of Russians older than 25 identify as Orthodox, those attentive to institutional Church life—such as by attending Easter worship services—amount to only a few percent. The same poll found a precipitous drop in those identifying as Orthodox among the 18-24 age group—just 23 percent.

This contrasts starkly with Ukraine, where a quarter of the population attends Easter services and a majority of 18-24 year-olds define as believers. Swift and total alienation of millions of Ukrainian Orthodox is a colossal price for Patriarch Kirill to pay for loyalty to Putin, Ukraine being where a third of his parishes and monasteries are located. The Patriarch’s international standing is also shot, as Orthodox abroad not gagged by the Kremlin’s new ban on criticism of the Russian armed forces have condemned the war—including Kirill’s own bishops in Estonia and Lithuania—along with Pope Francis and the Archbishop of Canterbury. Instead of a Russian World, the Moscow Patriarch may soon find his authority stopping at the borders of the Russian Federation.

The Church’s dwindling reach thus means that Putin cannot use it to restore the age-old dream of an expanded Holy Rus’. Approaching 70, however, Russia’s president has no long-term ambition to consolidate Orthodox spirituality—only his personal grip on power for however many more years God grants him.
TIME senior correspondent Simon Shuster spoke with Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky on April 19, 2022 at the Presidential compound in Kyiv. Following is an edited transcript of their conversation.

TIME: Last night, in your address to the nation, you announced the start of the battle for the Donbas, for eastern Ukraine. What led you to do that?

They have long been gathering this force of theirs. …Now we see that it’s complete, in terms of their readiness, in terms of their plans, in terms of the way we understand their military intentions.

Do you think this battle will be decisive?

I think that, in many respects, yes. I would characterize this period of the war as follows. We are dealing with a difficult threat along many vectors. A large part of our army is concentrated in the east of our country, today in the east and the south.

This will be a full-scale battle, bigger than any we have seen on the territory of Ukraine. They can push forward to the maximum occupation of our territory, to the encirclement of our most significant group of forces, the one in the east. They have the desire to do this.

In any case they will certainly be preoccupied with inflicting the maximum destruction from their side. Because they understand that this is our core. It will influence our dialogue. It will influence the way the figures are placed on the board in this game. It will influence, I think, the cohesion of our army, as well as the cohesion of their army. If we hold out – as I honestly believe we will, as a citizen, a patriot and the President of this country – it will be a decisive moment for us. The tipping point.

As for the next steps, including diplomacy. A serious part of our army is there, and many victims. That always has an impact. It does not seem to have much of an impact on the military leaders of the Russian Federation. But it sure has an impact on us, because I take seriously the number of people who might die from this full-scale battle.

Read More: Inside Zelensky’s World

Let me ask you about one part of this battle. Hundreds of your troops are besieged in Mariupol, inside the Azovstal steel factory, along with many civilians. Have you spoken to them?

We’re in pretty much daily contact. One of us speaks to them on the phone. I talked to them yesterday or the day before. Sometimes it’s on the phone, sometimes they write messages.

Messages directly to you?

Yes, directly to me. I get their texts. Sometimes they have questions. In some places the questions are truly difficult. They have it very hard. They are strong people. Many of those boys have died. They also have hundreds of wounded people to carry.

There are many issues we talk about. First of all, it’s about them holding out and really knowing what they are holding. It’s not just about some piece of this factory, Azovstal, or even Mariupol. It’s the symbolism of this situation. It’s the [enemy’s] desire to break one of the bones in our back.

For the Russians – it’s a symbol. That’s why they keep playing these little games, these bloody little games, in which they say they’re ready to make a trade, but don’t end up trading anyone.

As I see it, their actions are meant to degrade a person as much as possible, to make them starve… Yes, we wanted to make a trade for our wounded. We’re working on that and, I think, it could even work out. There are civilians there, civilian residents who are besieged, wounded and killed.

Could you say more about your communications with the people who are there?

The 36th [Separate Marine] Brigade had it really tough. It was all a catastrophe. No food, no water, no weapons. Nothing. They ran out of everything. We tried to support each other. [Their commander] explained the situation to me. The guys could not retreat. They could not attack or defend themselves, because they could not leave their friends behind. So that was the situation. It was a matter of humanity. It was emotional. It was a situation where people just need some support.

Read More: ‘Hope Gives You the Strength to Act.’ Portraits of Russians Risking Everything to Support Ukraine

Let’s talk about the start of the invasion. That first night, Feb. 24, I understand from your staff that there were attempts to storm this compound. There were gunfights in the street. Could you remember that night for me?

Well, I remember some things in a fragmented way. Each day at some point began to resemble the others. The first days were hard for all of us. I think we were all more or less in the same condition. Everyone in Ukraine, only with different responsibilities. And your responsibility puts pressure on the way you focus, on your priorities, and throws everything else to the side. You understand that this is war, and you don’t think about its symptoms. You recognize it all. You understand that they are watching. You are a symbol. You have to act the way a head of state must act. So of course I remember moments from that night. The explosions. The children.

What children?

Mine. We woke them up. It was loud. There were explosions over there, and so on. You understand. I came to the office. Pretty much all of us gathered, and we began to act very fast.

Your family was here with you at that moment?

Yes. We all have families. We’re human beings. And we had to make some fast decisions. As of this moment, I think the decisions we made, some on purpose and others by accident, were right.

Yes, we’re still sitting here.

Have you ever driven at high speed?

It happens.

I also went through that age at the wheel. And at that moment, at high speed, in the dark – it’s a question of focus. If you get distracted with someone running in front of the windshield, flashing lights, screaming, waving their hands…if you let any of that distract you, your chances of reaching your destination are low. Not quite zero, but very low.

Here it was roughly the same. It was necessary to focus on the main things. What do we need to do right now, how to organize, and most of all, to stay united? I think that, before the invasion, our society was in some ways divided. We were not a clenched fist. And then we were. I think that’s very important. They outnumber us by a lot. So we just needed to be a unified whole. That is our only chance.

During the invasion, when did you first leave the presidential compound?

We went out in the first days. In those first days we went out without any photos or any kind of news stories. The guards told me: Look, if you want to drive out, then we can’t make it public anywhere. We did not involve the press service. We drove out to look at the checkpoints, our soldiers and how they are doing. It was not a bad ride.

Your bodyguards must have been losing their minds.

Yes, they were losing their minds. We couldn’t go any further, because beyond that is already the blown-up bridge, the big crater, and going further is impossible. That would already be beyond the checkpoints.

Why did you go there?

I wanted to have a look, see what it’s like. Then I wanted to talk to the people there, to see how they’re feeling at the checkpoints.

And then there was the borsch trip?

The borsch was really super! I still remember it.

You went to the checkpoint and they were making borsch?

At the checkpoint there was this great guy. It was the irony of fate. Every day this guy comes to the defenders, to our guys. He lives somewhere in a village nearby. He just makes borsch without asking any questions. He talked about how much he hates the Russians. And then he says he served in the USSR. He showed us these medals he had in his trunk. Yes, he drives around with his medals. A wonderful man, because that man definitely knows what he’s doing. I love people who know the purpose of living every day. … This man wakes up every day, makes borsch and comes to the guys at the checkpoint just to feed them. He gave me some. So we had a good bowl of borsch with bread. We all had an extremely good time. And we all remember that moment.

We saw each other here on April 8, right after the Russian missile attack on the train station in Kramatorsk. Please tell me about that day. How did you learn about that attack?

I learned about it from one terrible photograph. I was sent a photograph of a woman who had been beheaded. It was not among the photographs we showed to inform people about the tragedy. I asked who had been nearby, whether there were children, and who died. She was wearing these bright, memorable clothes. And I said, it’s not possible. If children see this… if they see this from official sources. If anyone sees this.

Right after that, you had to go to a meeting with Ursula von der Leyen, the President of the European Commission, and I could see you were trying to hold back your emotions. How did you manage to do that?

Yes. It was one of those times when your arms and legs are doing one thing, but your head does not listen. Because your head is there at the station, and you need to be present here. But I think you just don’t have a choice. In those circumstances you have to be there and find an answer to this.

How have you changed since the invasion?

I’ve gotten older.

Have you lost your sense of humor?

Of course not! That’s impossible. It’s impossible to let that happen. It is a means of survival. Otherwise, everyone around would feel depressed. And feeling depressed is not a good way to win. You have to be in a victorious mood. No matter how hard it is, that’s the goal. The goal is definitely not to lose. So you can’t be in a mood of weakness or panic. You have to keep it together, and that togetherness has to be in everything – in your mood, your method, your words.

So in what sense have you aged?

Mentally, morally. Well, in a moral sense I’m absolutely firm. But I’ve aged from all this wisdom that I never wanted. It’s the wisdom tied to the number of people who have died, and the torture the Russian soldiers perpetrated. That kind of wisdom… To be honest, I never had the goal of attaining knowledge like that.

That reminds me of our first conversation, three years ago, at the premier of your comedy show here in Kyiv. Your life looked pretty good. Your whole troupe was there, all your friends. And I asked you: why would want to go into politics?

I remember that conversation.

Of course we didn’t know that there would be a full-scale war. But looking back, do you wonder about that decision? Do you regret it?

Of course I don’t regret it. I don’t regret it at all. Not for a second. I don’t even thing about it. On the contrary I sometimes think that it was right. It was very right.

Since the invasion, what has been the hardest time of day for you?

Of course it’s when I lay down to sleep.

Why?

Well, because I don’t fully understand whether it’s time or not. Whether I have the right. Was there something else I needed to do? I look at my schedule. It’s pointless to look at it. It’s the same agenda. I see it’s over for today. But I look at it several times and sense that something is wrong. It’s my conscience bothering me. I’ve allowed myself to sleep. But now what? Something is happening right now.

To be honest, in the first days I woke everybody up. It was between 4:50 and 5:20. Those were the first days. That was the difficult period I told you about, when I didn’t have the right to go to sleep before I knew how many [bombs] landed where.

During your last meeting with your generals, what did they tell you about the battle for the east?

We understand that this process has commenced. The question now is whether it commenced with full force. … At certain points in the east, it’s just insane. A full-scale war of the harshest kind is happening there every day. It’s horrible. Really horrible in terms of the frequency of the strikes, the heavy artillery fire, and the losses. In those places it’s already begun.
Politics can be cutthroat, but Australian businessman Jason Yat-sen Li wasn’t expecting to have his loyalty to his country questioned when he ran for a seat in the New South Wales legislative assembly in a mid-February by-election.

His sister-in-law and several others told him that they had been approached at polling stations by voters bandying rumors. “They’d say, ‘Jason is associated with the Chinese Communist Party,’ and things like that,” he tells TIME.

Li, whose parents came to Australia from China more than 60 years ago, isn’t sure who was behind it, nor does he think it was sanctioned by his rival’s campaign. But while he won the by-election, he does think discrimination against Chinese Australians—who make up just under 5% of the country’s 26 million population—is being exacerbated by the anti-China rhetoric that’s become a feature of the May 21 federal polls.

Scott Morrison, Australia's prime minister, arrives at the National Press Club in Canberra, Australia, on Monday, Feb. 1, 2021. "We remain committed to engagement with China," Morrison said. (Mark Graham/Bloomberg via Getty Images)
Scott Morrison, Australia's prime minister, arrives at the National Press Club in Canberra, Australia, on Monday, Feb. 1, 2021. "We remain committed to engagement with China," Morrison said. Mark Graham/Bloomberg via Getty Images
Australian politicians getting tough on China
Although issues like the economy and cost of living are front and center of the campaign, Prime Minister Scott Morrison of the Liberal Party has positioned himself as tough on China—even making baseless claims that opposition leader Anthony Albanese is Beijing’s preferred candidate. On Feb. 16, Morrison also called the opposition Labor Party’s deputy leader Richard Marles a Manchurian candidate—implying that Marles was a puppet of Beijing. Although the remarks were later withdrawn, last week the prime minister taunted Marles for having what Morrison described a “strangely high” number of meetings with Chinese diplomats.

Meanwhile, defense minister Peter Dutton announced at a May 13 press conference that a Chinese spy ship had been spotted off the coast of Western Australia. While Dutton called it an “act of aggression,” a senator from the Greens party called it a “desperate” move to make people “scared” and former prime minister Kevin Rudd dismissed Dutton as an “idiot.”

Read More: Climate Could Change the Course of Australia’s Election

Such rhetoric doesn’t just come from the Liberal Party, however. The Labor Party has rolled out ads on social media raising national security concerns about Hong-Kong-born Liberal member of parliament Gladys Liu. In 2019, the Australian Broadcasting Corporation claimed that Liu had past ties with “a Hong Kong-based organisation that experts say is affiliated with China’s efforts to exert influence on foreign governments and expatriate Chinese.”

Fringe groups have made things even worse. A truck-mounted billboard featuring a photo of Chinese president Xi Jinping, casting a ballot with the text “Vote Labor,” was driven around Parliament House in Canberra in March. The billboard was backed by the conservative lobbying group Advance Australia.

Fringe conservative political movement ‘Advance Australia’ - set up in 2018 to fight “woke politicians” and “elitist activist groups” - is this week driving a provocative mobile billboard around Parliament House to campaign against Labor and the Greens pic.twitter.com/WiWl18Rzdq

— Andrew Greene (@AndrewBGreene) March 8, 2022
 

Australia’s history of anti-Asian racism
The political establishment likes to tout Australia as a model multicultural society, but anti-Asian racism has deep roots. Starting in the late 19th century, a series of laws aimed at restricting Chinese migration to Australia were passed, eventually evolving into the “White Australia” policy that prevented migration by non-Europeans for much of the 20th century.

The painful legacy of that discrimination has been compounded by the pandemic. Relations between China and Australia deteriorated markedly in 2020, when Australia called for an investigation into the origins of COVID-19, and Beijing responded by blacklisting some Australian exports. In 2021, 18% of Chinese-Australians were physically threatened or attacked because of their Chinese heritage, and 34% were discriminated against because of it, according to the report Being Chinese in Australia, released last month by think-tank the Lowy Institute. The advocacy group Asian Australian Alliance has recorded more than 600 reports of abuse and attacks against Asian Australians since April 2020.

June Loh is of Chinese descent and moved to Australia from Singapore about 15 years ago, settling in Melbourne. She says racism has increased over the last two years. Her husband was called a “cockroach” as he walked down the street, and a man threw her and her son’s bags off a bench at the local swimming pool. Loh, who works in real estate, says that her signboards have also been vandalized with abusive graffiti about COVID-19.

Read More: Anti-Asian Attacks and Hate Crimes on the Rise Worldwide

It’s changed the way that the 42-year-old and her family behave. “We are more aware of our surroundings. We used to like to go to country towns but now, there’s this fear of, ‘Oh it’s going to be so white, will we face racism? We used to go out at night—now we’re like, hm, maybe not a good idea.'”

Other Asian Australians have had similar experiences. Politician Sally Sitou, who is running in the upcoming federal election for a seat in the suburban Sydney electorate of Reid, posted on Twitter about abuse she’s received. “My loyalties have only ever been to Australia,” she wrote.

My loyalties have only ever been to Australia. That they are being questioned now speaks to the undertones of racism I fear are spreading. We are a great multicultural country that has welcomed generations of migrants. It's a history we ought to be proud of 4/7

— Sally Sitou MP 陈莎莉 (@SallySitou) November 30, 2021
Worsening conditions for Asian Australians
Advocates say that the tone of anti-Asian racism has changed as the result of the anti-China rhetoric used during the election campaign. Erin Wen Ai Chew, the co-founder of the Asian Australian Alliance, says the government and tabloid media have focused on China being an enemy of Australia, which has fueled a divisive mentality. “We are now perceived as all suspicious and our loyalties get questioned.”

Li says that anti-Asian racism has changed from what he describes as “schoolyard-type racism” that he faced at school. “Now, it’s much more dangerous because it’s not about what you like, which is just at the surface. It’s about what you believe, what your values are, where your allegiances lie and can you be trusted.”

He continues: “I don’t think it’s something that we’ve dealt with before. There are kind of loose similarities with, for instance, terrorism and anti-Muslim sentiments. It’s a specific country with a specific government that is being described, politically as a threat, and that rubs off on domestic populations that have cultural and family ties … with that place.”

Campaign posters displayed outside an early polling station in the Box Hill suburb of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia, on Friday, May 13, 2022. (Carla Gottgens/Bloomberg via Getty Images)
Campaign posters displayed outside an early polling station in the Box Hill suburb of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia, on Friday, May 13, 2022. Carla Gottgens/Bloomberg via Getty Images
In Melbourne, Loh says she didn’t dare leave her office for several hours recently when a rally by the United Australia Party took place nearby. The fringe, right-wing group has made unsubstantiated claims that an airport in Western Australia, built by Chinese-owned Sino Iron to fly workers in and out of the remote site, could be used in a Chinese military invasion. (Many big mines in Western Australia have such airports, regardless of ownership.)

Amonths-long effort to create a new government in Iraq fell into disarray after the influential Shi’ite cleric Muqtada al-Sadr asked all 73 lawmakers in his political bloc to withdraw from parliament on Sunday. They followed through that day, with the Parliament Speaker accepting their request. Sadr’s candidate for Prime Minister stepped back from vying for the role, too.

The withdrawal significantly disrupts the make-up of the 329-seat legislative body—likely giving more parliamentary power to pro-Iran parties. It could also help align Sadr’s party with Iraqi protesters who have since 2019 condemned the country’s political system altogether, if the move is viewed as a rejection of the status quo.

Experts say the political paralysis since elections in October is partly due to long simmering discontent among Iraqis who feel the political system prioritizes keeping elites in power over providing essential services such as access to electricity and clean water. In the short term, it’s also caused by Sadr’s inability to push through political reforms that would have consolidated his party’s power.

Following the U.S.-led invasion in 2003, Iraq’s political system was set up under U.S. auspices as a consensus government that provides a seat at the table for all major political parties. “That may sound good in theory but what it amounted to was just a division of the spoils and political power, so corruption ran rampant,” says David Romano, a professor of Middle East politics at Missouri State University. “No one really had to do anything or perform because they were guaranteed their share of power every election just by virtue of coming from major ethno-sectarian communities.”

Sadr, who is viewed largely as an Iraqi nationalist and populist leader, has argued that his call to withdraw his supporters from parliament is in service of the Iraqi people. “If the survival of the Sadrist bloc is an obstacle to the formation of the government, then all representatives of the bloc are ready to resign from Parliament,” Sadr said in a statement.

According to experts, having a consensus government is partly to blame for cementing a system that is unresponsive to the needs of the Iraqi people. Under this style of governance, elites pilfered state institutions and used them to build personalized patronage networks, says Fanar Haddad, an assistant professor at the University of Copenhagen and expert on Iraqi politics. “The elites in question claimed to represent communities but they never were representative of the communities,” Haddad says. “It raised the political relevance of ethnic and sectarian identities because they became the primary currency of political life.”

Sadr, whose party fared well in the October elections, wanted to use his electoral advantage to break that tradition so that the government could have a freer hand to pass legislation and enact policies, Haddad says. “Ultimately, [Sadr’s move is] about creating a system with less players that excludes some of his competitors and helps him assert dominance within the political system,” Haddad adds. Sadr has been blocked in his attempts to do that by opposition parties, who have resorted to derailing parliamentary sessions and other tactics.

As a result, little has changed. “Whenever you have an election, it’s the same leaders that come back, the same last names, the same people playing a game of musical chairs—shuffling their people around government. And so you don’t really see change coming from that,” says Renad Mansour, a research fellow in the Middle East and North Africa Programme and director of the Iraq Initiative at Chatham House, a London-based think-tank focused on international affairs.

The primary divisions in Iraq are traditionally thought of as those along Shi’ite, Sunni, and Kurdish lines—who make up 62%, 30%, and 16% of the country’s population, respectively, according to a 2014 Pew poll. (Kurds are almost entirely Sunni, meaning Iraq’s religious breakdown is roughly 60% Shia and 40% Sunni.) However, Mansour says that the main source of tension for the last decade has actually been between the political elites and Iraqi masses, rather than between the various sects and ethnic groups. “The paralysis is primarily due to an elite that is both economically and ideologically bankrupt and because of that the population is rising up against their own leaders.”

Between 2019-2021, mass demonstrations swept through Iraqi cities in protest of political sectarianism and the state’s failure to provide jobs or basic services such as electricity and sewage. Those protests prompted the resignation of Prime Minister Adil Abdul-Mahdi and the October elections that saw Sadr’s bloc win 73 seats.

Read more: Iraq Protests: What Do the Protesters Want?

Mansour says that because the protests are against the entire system, political parties like Sadr’s play close attention to securing the support of Iraqis on the street. Analysts suggest that Sadr, a populist leader, may have resorted to this relatively extreme tactic of withdrawal as a way to align himself with the masses. “The parliamentary bloc is not the only source of power. It also competes with military power and street power,” says Haddad. Sadr may want to project a message that his party was so against the system that they resigned altogether, Haddad says. “His plan may be not just to mobilize people but to call for demonstrations in order to bring down the forthcoming government and humiliate his opponents.”

Experts add that to deal with the vacuum left by the resignations, candidates who earned the second highest number of votes in the given parliamentary district would be able to replace them. However, there’s skepticism that Sadrists will actually entirely withdraw from the government. “I don’t think it’s irreversible and this is a tactic through which he can apply pressure on and possibly outflank his opponents,” Haddad says.

In the last few years, the Sadrists have become the most powerful party in the government—and subsequently one that many Iraqis blame for their grievances—but they simultaneously want to be the face of protest and opposition, Mansour says. “The fundamental dilemma the Sadrists are facing is that they want to do both.”

But for many Iraqis, these parliamentary squibbles are hardly top of mind, given the state of the country’s public services. “There is this deep sense that what should be on paper a fabulously wealthy country can’t even keep the lights on. It’s an unresponsive political system, [for] almost 20 years now,” Haddad says.
On the campaign trail, President Biden talked tough on Saudi Arabia. He said the kingdom should be treated as a “pariah” after the murder of Saudi dissident and Washington Post columnist Jamal Khashoggi. One of his first acts as President was to declassify the Office of the Director of National Intelligence’s assessment that Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman approved Khashoggi’s killing.

That was then. As Biden travels through the Middle East for the first time as President, his campaign’s emphasis on human rights has given way to realpolitik. The White House has concluded that the U.S. needs its old ally Saudi Arabia on its side as America leads the global effort to punish Moscow economically for its brutal war in Ukraine, and prepares for a new era of confrontation with Russia. “The Russian invasion of Ukraine gave this trip more of a great-power-competition focus,” says Aaron David Miller, a former senior advisor for Middle East policy at the State Department.

Biden has had to swallow his pride and make nice in Saudi Arabia. As the 46th president visited Jeddah on Friday after his swing through Israel and the West Bank, he’s attending a meeting of Gulf states and agreed to a face-to-face sit down with bin Salman, the de facto ruler of Saudi Arabia. Stepping out of his armored limousine in the vestibule outside the palace in Jeddah, Biden offered his fist to bin Salman. The crown prince put out his own fist and bumped Biden’s. That moment, and the closed-door meeting that followed, highlighted Biden’s willingness to put U.S. strategic interests ahead of the Kingdom’s noxious human rights record.

Even as sanctions begin to bite the Russian economy, the U.S. is seeing countries worldwide hedge their bets. Israel, for example, continues to maintain its open relations with Russia in hopes of managing security threats from Syria, where Russia has a military base, and tending to longstanding ties between Israelis and Russian Jews. Saudi Arabia, for its part, sees its relationship with oil-rich Russia as way to help influence global energy markets, on which the Saudi economy largely depends.

Similar cross-cutting interests are playing out across the globe. “Of the 10 most populated countries in the world, only one has bought on to a comprehensive package against Russia—and that’s us,” Miller says. That’s why Biden’s trip is part of a broader effort by the U.S. to shore up what wonks inside the West Wing call “middle powers,” those countries who could be lured to Russia’s side as the conflict in Ukraine reheats the competition between Moscow and Washington. “It is precisely because the world is becoming more geopolitically competitive” that the U.S needs to “remain intensively engaged in the Middle East,” National Security Advisor Jake Sullivan told reporters before Biden left on his trip. One of Biden’s objectives for his time in the region, Sullivan said, is to ensure that “no foreign power can dominate or gain strategic advantage over the United States.”

Russian President Vladimir Putin (L) meets with Saudi Arabia's Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, on October 14, 2019. (Alexey Nikolsky—Sputnik/AFP/Getty Images)
Russian President Vladimir Putin (L) meets with Saudi Arabia's Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, on October 14, 2019. Alexey Nikolsky—Sputnik/AFP/Getty Images
The U.S. has the edge in much of the Mideast. The Saudi-Russia connection is nowhere near as deep as Riyadh’s with the United States, which dates to the decades after the House of Saud seized power on the peninsula in the early 20th century. Moscow’s relationship with Riyadh was tense following the Soviet Union’s 1979 invasion of Afghanistan and the Saudi and U.S. effort to back mujahideen fighters resisting the Russian occupation. Diplomatic relations between Russia and Saudi Arabia weren’t re-established until 1992.

But the U.S. can’t take Saudi Arabia for granted. Russia and Saudi Arabia took a step closer to each other in 2016, when Saudi leaders convinced Russia to join an expanded version of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries known as OPEC Plus. That partnership has been one of convenience and was partially motivated by Saudi frustration at seeing the U.S. develop fracking and shale extraction technologies that boosted U.S. oil production.

The Saudi-led group of oil producers agreed in June to increase oil sales, but production so far has lagged behind the targets. Any increase in oil production from the region will take months to have an impact on high U.S. gas prices, a major political liability for Biden going into the midterm elections.

Over time, the Saudis apparently have come to see the U.S. as a “less reliable partner,” and that’s created an opening for Russia, says Eugene Rumer, the director of the Russia and Eurasia Program at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace and a former national intelligence officer for Russia and Eurasia at the U.S. National Intelligence Council. Russia and Saudi Arabia “share a common aversion to the U.S. bringing up human rights as a major policy issue,” Rumer says. Russian President Vladimir Putin “is only happy to jump in where the United States seems to be leaving some vacuum,” Rumer says. Putin doesn’t have much to offer the Saudis in the long term. “But for Putin, there’s a sense of playing on the big stage again,” Rumer says.

For more than two decades, the U.S. has worked to integrate Russia into the global economy on the idea that Russia’s interests would start to align more with American and European economic interests. But Putin’s shown with his repeated invasions of Ukraine that he’s unwilling to moderate his ambitions. And Russia’s ties to the world economy have now become one of its strategic assets, as the U.S. and Europe experience how difficult it is to isolate Russia’s $1.7 trillion economy without damaging the European and American economies.

Saudi Arabia and the U.S. also both view Iran as a threat, a concern that may also argue against placing human rights at the top of the list of Washington’s priorities with Riyadh. “When you are leading the most powerful and significant country in the world, sometimes you have to meet with people and go to countries where they are a seriously problematic partner,” says Bradley Bowman, a former Army officer and an expert on U.S. military strategy with the Foundation for Defense of Democracies. Bowman believes it would be “negligent” for Biden not to go to Saudi Arabia.

U.S. Vice President Joe Biden arrives to offer his condolences on the death of the late Saudi Crown Prince Sultan bin Abdul-Aziz Al Saud at Riyadh airbase in Riyadh on October 27, 2011. (Fahad Shadeed—Reuters)
U.S. Vice President Joe Biden arrives to offer his condolences on the death of the late Saudi Crown Prince Sultan bin Abdul-Aziz Al Saud at Riyadh airbase in Riyadh on October 27, 2011. Fahad Shadeed—Reuters
The U.S. also has an eye on China’s increasingly global ambitions. “We know that Russia never left the Middle East and we know that China’s active there, both diplomatically and economically,” Bowman says. China’s first overseas military base was established in Djibouti near a U.S. military base in that country.

If the U.S. is going to compete in this “great power competition” in the Middle East, Bowman says, it has to tend to its relationship with countries there. “That doesn’t mean we need to have hundreds and hundreds of thousands of troops there necessarily,” Bowman says. But if the U.S. doesn’t keep up some of its military relationships there, “Chinese and Russians will be among those most happily waving goodbye as we depart the Middle East,” Bowman says.

“President Biden would love to see OPEC in general and Saudi Arabia in particular producing more oil to try to get gas prices down, but if you’re constantly criticizing Riyadh and you’re constantly talking about how you want to leave the Middle East and pivot elsewhere,” Bowman says, “then when you come calling hat in hand with requests about pumping more oil or doing this or doing that, anyone who tries to maintain personal relationships understands that may be not be well received.”

After Biden departs, Putin will be visiting the region next week. The Russian President is scheduled to meet in Tehran with the leaders of Iran and Turkey. The Biden Administration is concerned that Iran is selling drones to Russia for use on the battlefield in Ukraine.
European leaders’ relief over last week’s resumption of natural gas flows from Russia’s Nord Stream 1 pipeline was short-lived, after the Kremlin announced on Monday that it would reduce supply to the E.U. from Wednesday.

The flow of gas from Nord Stream 1, a vital undersea pipeline that links Russian gas to Europe via Germany, had initially been halted for 10 days from July 11 for what Russia says were maintenance issues. The pipeline is currently operating at 40% of its capacity but that figure will drop to 20% from this week. The E.U. has previously accused Moscow of energy blackmail, and on Tuesday the bloc’s energy ministers struck a deal to reduce gas consumption by 15% from August to March amid fears of a total cut-off in the coming winter months.

Russia is the main supplier of gas for many European countries, which is used to heat homes in winter and power industries. The resource has become a focal point of E.U.-Russia tensions, with Moscow having already cut off gas to six countries and reducing supply to six more in response to the bloc’s sanctions over the war in Ukraine.

The E.U. has been planning for the worst-case scenario, seeking additional gas imports from countries such as Nigeria. Analysts tell TIME that, to secure European energy security, the bloc will need to continue to encourage demand reduction and invest in green energy alternatives.

Where does Europe get its gas from?
The E.U. imports a huge amount of its natural gas—around 40% prior to the war in Ukraine—from Russia because it’s both cheap and convenient, with the Nord Stream 1 pipeline carrying the majority of it. Germany alone accounted for around 20% of Russia’s total gas exports in 2020—but Germany also distributes Russian gas to other European countries.

The import route was due to be expanded with the parallel Nord Stream 2 pipeline. Although construction was completed in September, Germany shelved the project in February in response to Russia’s aggression in Ukraine.

Europe’s dependency on Russian gas was no accident, explains Raphael Hanoteaux, senior policy adviser at climate change think tank E3G. It was part of a decades-long project spearheaded by Germany to tie the two countries together. “Germany’s theory was that by increasing dependency on Russia, they would be trading with them more,” Hanoteaux says. “And if Germany and Russia were co-dependent, it would be less likely that they’d become adversaries.”

For a while, says John Lough, associate fellow at London-based think tank Chatham House, this theory seemed to work. “Even [during the Cold War] after the Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan and through to the nuclear weapons crisis in the early 1980s, the gas flowed, because the Soviet Union needed hard currency, and Europe wanted Soviet gas.” Germany continued to back the construction of the Nord Stream 2 pipeline in 2015, even after Russia’s annexation of Ukraine’s Crimea region in 2014.

But the war in Ukraine exposed the flaws in Germany’s high-risk strategy, says Lough, as Russia is leveraging its control over gas exports to increase pressure on European leaders. “That was a gamble that [Germany] took—we’re now seeing that it hasn’t paid off.”

Read more: Putin Still Holds the Cards When It Comes to Global Energy

Why Europe is preparing for a disruption of Russian gas
Russia currently supplies around 15% of Europe’s natural gas, well below pre-war levels. That decline has sent energy prices skyrocketing, and is contributing to a cost-of-living crisis and economic anxiety across much of Europe. Moscow’s latest announcement has only stoked those concerns.

“Russia is blackmailing us. Russia is using energy as a weapon,” said European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen, ahead of Moscow’s announcement. “Therefore, in any event, whether it’s a partial, major cut-off of Russian gas or a total cut-off of Russian gas, Europe needs to be ready.”

The E.U. has previously committed to reducing gas imports from Russia by two-thirds within a year, and is seeking to diversify with other suppliers, including Israel, Egypt and Azerbaijan. Human rights groups have criticized the E.U.’s approach, arguing that repressive regimes in countries like Azerbaijan will use the deals to evade accountability for rights violations.

And after months of intermittent reductions in gas flows to Europe, storage facilities in Germany are at about 65% capacity, well short of the government’s 90% target.

How Europe plans to cope
According to Massimo Di Odoardo, vice president of global gas research at energy consultancy firm Wood Mackenzie, the combination of additional supplies and demand reduction will help Europe reach storage levels in excess of 80% by the beginning of the winter. By Wood Mackenzie’s accounts, Europe-wide demand for gas is currently down by a fifth compared to the same period last year.

Although E.U. countries may be able to avoid imposing formal rationing on individuals, says Di Odoardo, continued increases to energy bills will stimulate a natural reduction in consumption. Wood Mackenzie’s analysis found that European demand for gas was down by 10-11% in the first six months of the year compared to last year.

And it’s not just consumers who will have to reduce consumption. In Germany, industry accounts for about a third of the country’s gas use. Companies in energy-intensive industries, such as chemicals and metals, are warning of knock-on effects on the whole economy.

The risk remains that Moscow will continue to “turn the screw” on European governments, especially if things don’t go in Russia’s favor in Ukraine, says Chatham House’s Lough. The Commission said a Europe-wide cut-off during winter could have a major impact on member state economies, reducing GDP growth by up to 1.5%. The International Monetary Fund warned it could plunge countries into recession. Particularly bad weather could make the situation even worse.

Read more: Here’s How to Solve the World’s Russian Oil Problem

But according to Di Odoardo, as long as Russia continues to benefit from European payments, the bloc is unlikely to be completely cut-off. “Russia has been living in the best of both worlds—successfully reducing flows and putting pressure on Europe, while increasing prices and getting high revenues.”

A June report by the Centre For Research on Energy and Clean Air found that Russia earned $97 billion in revenue from oil and gas exports in the first 100 days of the war in Ukraine, with the majority of that revenue coming from E.U. countries. The figure exceeds the estimated costs of Russia’s war in Ukraine, the report added.

In the long term, however, analysts say that Moscow’s manipulation of gas prices and supply will only accelerate Europe’s move away from Russian energy. Beyond the E.U.’s plans to reduce Russian gas imports by two-thirds within a year, the bloc has released a strategy to halt Russian oil imports via sea by the end of 2022.

That shift will, in the long run, include a renewed emphasis on renewable energy. “It’s never been cheaper and it’s never made more sense to actually invest in [green energy],” says E3G’s Hanoteaux. Although countries like Germany have been forced to break their own climate targets in reverting to coal and other fossil fuels in the short run, the emphasis on reducing demand could establish more sustainable consumption habits in future. “It’s not just a climate issue, but it’s also a security issue,” he says.
More than 1 million people have been displaced by drought in Somalia, according to staggering figures released yesterday by the U.N. Refugee Agency and Norwegian Refugee Council (NRC). The majority of them—some 775,000 people—were displaced this year as the country of 16 million grapples with a drought that began in January 2021. It’s Somalia’s worst one in decades, forcing people from rural areas to flee to cities in search of food and water.

For a country already struggling with a three-decade old civil war and political instability, the environmental catastrophe has had devastating consequences. Crops are failing while millions of livestock die, as the drought cripples the main source of income for 80% of the population, leaving 5 million people at risk of starvation. The U.N. humanitarian coordinator for Somalia, Adam Abdelmoula, said in June that thousands of Somalis have already died.

But as famine looms amid warnings of a fifth failed rainy season in the coming months, the world is mostly looking the other way. Experts tell TIME that, rather than view the drought as a domestic issue, the international community should see it as a harbinger of more to come—that the climate emergency will continue to have disproportionate effects on the Global South and jeopardize global security.

“Now we have a weather pattern [in Somalia] that is increasingly erratic, with less rain in the last decade, and flooding when there is rain,” says Mohamed Abdi, NRC’s Somalia country director. “And climate change means the situation is only going to get worse.”

The war in Ukraine is exacerbating the crisis. In 2020, Somalia imported $17.7 million of grain, with 90% coming from Russia and Ukraine. The disruption to grain supplies caused by the war has sent food prices soaring, making it more expensive to substitute the food once provided by livestock with wheat. The number of people facing crisis hunger levels is expected to rise to more than 7 million by September, according to Relief Web International.

According to Claire McConnell, climate diplomacy policy adviser at London-based think tank E3G, the war in Ukraine is shining a light on a food security crisis that has been years in the making. “Many countries in the Global South were already really struggling with prices for certain commodities in part due to supply chain disruptions during the COVID-19 pandemic, but mostly due to the climate impacts in crop-producing countries,” she says.

The drought in Somalia demonstrates how the climate crisis acts like a “threat multiplier,” McConnell says, with knock-on effects on human life, livelihoods, agriculture, industry and even national security.

Meanwhile, militants are exploiting the drought to strengthen their grip on the east African nation. The al-Qaeda-allied al-Shabab controls large swaths of the countryside in central and southern Somalia, making almost 900,000 Somalis in need of aid unreachable to international organizations. Militants have reportedly been demanding payment from aid organizations to distribute food and are taking credit for the supplies in order to shore up rural support.

This is also complicating Washington’s mission in Somalia. U.S. President Joe Biden in May ordered the return of nearly 500 troops to support the fight against al-Shabab, after the election of Hassan Sheikh Mohamud as Somalia’s President ended a political vacuum of more than a year.

Read More: Why Biden Is Redeploying Troops to Somalia

E3G’s McConnell draws a comparison to the 2011 Arab uprisings, where rising food prices caused by political instability and extreme weather triggered a wave of social unrest.

The crisis will only get worse as long as the international community looks the other way, says Abdi. “Even though as humanitarian organizations we have been talking about it for months now, the resources have been very slow to come,” he adds. Washington pledged an additional $476 million in aid to Somalia in July, but the U.N. says it needs $1.5 billion to protect people from hunger and poverty.

Experts say that long-term investment in the Global South is just as important as short-term help, as climate change accelerates the frequency and intensity of such environmental crises. Somalia “needs funding to support communities in building resilience,” Abdi adds, “to grow crops that are resilient to the extreme weather patterns, and build water infrastructures in case of rain season failure.”

The 27th U.N. Climate Change Conference due to be hosted in Sharm El-Sheikh, Egypt in November will put the commitments made by rich nations at last year’s COP26 conference to the test, McConnell says. “A lot of local communities [in the Global South] already have some of the skills and the knowledge to help adapt to some of these climate impacts, but are often lacking the finance or the support to scale that.”

But the millions of people in Somalia potentially facing starvation can’t afford to wait until then. “If we don’t do anything in the coming weeks and months, I’m afraid we will see more deaths,” Abdi says. “Somalia has become the forgotten crisis, and the world needs to pay attention.”
For now, an Aug. 7 Egyptian-brokered truce in Gaza between Israel and the militant group Palestinian Islamic Jihad (PIJ) appears to be largely holding, pausing another round of violence that began days earlier and has killed dozens of Palestinians and sent rockets flying from Gaza to within three miles of Jerusalem. (However, Israeli forces killed at least three Palestinians in a shoot-out on Aug. 9 during a raid against militants in the occupied West Bank.) Unfortunately, this latest deadly showdown between Israel and PIJ is likely a precursor of more conflict to come.

It’s never easy to pinpoint exactly when and why a flare-up in fighting between Israel and Palestinians begins. Before this month’s violence, at least 53 Palestinians were killed between March and July, including Palestinian American Al Jazeera journalist Shireen Abu Akleh. During the same period, a spate of attacks by Palestinians killed at least 19 people in Israel.

Read More: Niece of Slain Al Jazeera Journalist Shireen Abu Akleh on Justice for Her Family

In recent weeks, Israeli officials had begun to fear that PIJ was preparing for more violence in the West Bank. On Aug. 1, Israeli police arrested Bassem al-Saadi, PIJ’s leader in the West Bank, in the city of Jenin, home to two of the attackers who had killed Israelis. The militant group immediately began issuing threats. This was not al-Saadi’s first arrest, but tensions spiked further when a video was released showing the force used to subdue him and an Israeli police dog biting him.

Then, on Aug. 5, Israel launched strikes into Gaza that killed a senior PIJ commander. The militant group responded by firing dozens of rockets into Israeli territory. On Aug. 6, Israel launched more airstrikes into Gaza, and PIJ sharply increased the number of rockets it fired, though there have been no Israeli deaths or injuries reported so far. The violence continued into Aug. 7, with the Palestinian death toll reaching at least 46, including 16 children and four women. Gaza’s Health Ministry says that 360 Palestinians were also wounded. Israeli officials say their strikes killed several senior PIJ members and destroyed both weapon-storage sites and tunnels. The cease-fire followed news that hospitals in Gaza were overwhelmed and could not handle a continuing surge of wounded people.

For its part, Hamas, which has governed Gaza after winning Palestinian legislative elections in 2006, remained largely on the sidelines as Israel made clear its strikes would be targeted at the smaller, more radical PIJ. But given the death toll, it’s far from easy for Hamas to remain above the fray. And PIJ has incentive to create conflicts that increase its popularity with Palestinians in both Gaza and the West Bank.

Read More: On Biden’s Middle East Trip, Human Rights Aren’t a Priority

Adding to the incentive for escalation, Israel is heading for another election in November. Caretaker Prime Minister Yair Lapid has good political reason to take as uncompromising a line as possible. He lacks the military expertise that many Israelis expect of their leaders, and is due to face off against former Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu.

Finally, there’s the Iran angle. PIJ has close ties with Iran, and it’s possible that Iran’s government will again encourage the Palestinian militant group to create more trouble for Israel to improve Iran’s bargaining power as diplomats in Vienna continue to try to hash out a return to the 2015 Iran nuclear deal. Before the cease-fire, PIJ’s secretary general issued threats of attack against Israel during a visit to Tehran. On that trip, he met with both Iran’s president, Ebrahim Raisi, and a senior advisor to Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei.

It was just 15 months ago that a burst of Israeli-Palestinian attacks and counterattacks killed hundreds and wounded thousands, most of them Palestinian. Since Israeli forces withdrew from Gaza 17 years ago this month, there have been military clashes in 2008, 2012, 2014 and 2021. All the conditions that spark these wildfires remain in place, not least the crippling 15-year-long Israeli-led blockade. Even if the current cease-fire remains in force, the risk remains that the next war will be even more destructive.
AU.S. Navy helicopter and patrol ship stopped an Iranian vessel from capturing an American sea drone in the Persian Gulf on Tuesday, marking the latest high-profile clash between the two nations as they negotiate a possible return to the 2015 nuclear deal.

The Biden Administration and Iranian officials have exchanged written responses in recent weeks in pursuit of a deal that would lift economic sanctions against Iran in exchange for restrictions on Iran’s advancing nuclear program. Diplomats from the U.S., Europe and Iran are discussing the details of the potential plan in hopes of restoring the 2015 multilateral nuclear agreement, known formally as the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA).

Even as a deal may be coming within reach of American and Iranian diplomats, however, a string of recent military and other confrontations between the two nations threatens the progress. In the past month alone American forces and Iran-backed militias have traded attacks inside Syria that have left three U.S. service members wounded and four militants killed.

Iran-linked threats have also recently struck closer to home. On Aug. 10, the FBI indicted an Iranian national for a plot to kill former National Security Adviser John Bolton. Five days later, author Salman Rushdie was stabbed in New York by a suspect allegedly motivated by the late-Iranian leader Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini’s 1989 religious decree, or fatwa, to kill the writer.

The Administration says nuclear negotiations must remain separate from other disputes, but the rising confrontations complicate President Joe Biden’s efforts not only to achieve a deal but to sell it to the American people. The Administration must submit any deal it agrees to with Iran for a 30-day congressional review. Although it’s unlikely that the current Congress can kill the deal, it could loom large during the final days of the midterm elections in November.

If Biden removes any terrorism-related sanctions, he will be attacked from the right for looking soft. Critics in Congress, primarily Republicans, have blasted any prospect of rolling back sanctions worth billions of dollars and forging a lasting agreement with a nation that shows no signs of abating what they call “malign activities.”

If President Biden grants the Iranian regime billions in sanctions relief to rejoin a shorter and weaker nuclear deal, Republicans will strongly oppose.

But this wasn't inevitable. Biden promised a "longer and stronger" deal - and Republicans were willing to play ball. 👇

— Sen. Jim Inhofe (@JimInhofe) August 24, 2022
On Tuesday, the U.S. Navy said in a statement that Iran’s Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC) attempted to tow away an unmanned surface vessel, dubbed a Saildrone Explorer, around 11 p.m. local time on Monday in international waters. The USS Thunderbolt was in the area and immediately responded, the Navy said, while a MH-60S Sea Hawk helicopter launched from a base nearby in Bahrain. Once they arrived on-scene the IRGC disconnected the towing line to the drone, which was equipped with sensors, radars and cameras, and about four hours later left the area.

“This incident once again demonstrates Iran’s continued destabilizing, illegal, and unprofessional activity in the Middle East,” said General Michael “Erik” Kurilla, who commands all U.S. forces in the region.

The JCPOA only addresses one of several areas of disagreement between Washington and Tehran, so it’s not surprising that friction continues elsewhere, says Ali Vaez, the Iran project director at the International Crisis Group. “Both Iran and the U.S. are demonstrating that they can walk and chew gum at the same time: negotiate to restore the nuclear deal as if there is no regional tension and push back regionally as if there are no nuclear negotiations,” he says. “There is, however, always a risk that tensions over regional competition spill over into the nuclear talks. If there is a single American killed in the region, restoring the JCPOA will become a hundred times more difficult.”

Administration officials have publicly insisted that JCPOA talks have not affected U.S. military actions. But Middle East watchers noted that it took eight days for U.S. forces to respond to Aug. 15 drone and rocket attacks by Iranian proxy groups on two different American installations in Syria. When American fighter jets did launch airstrikes on the proxy positions in eastern Syria, the bombing runs were made to “limit the risk of escalation and minimize the risk of casualties,” according to a military statement.

Colin Kahl, undersecretary of defense for policy, told reporters Aug. 24 at the Pentagon, that the U.S. military had initially identified 11 bunkers, but only struck nine because it appeared from the sky as if there was human activity near two of them. “We held off striking those out of an abundance of caution,” he said. “The Administration has been pretty clear that in the event that Iran moves back into compliance with the JCPOA, that’s in our interest, because it pushes Iran further away from a nuclear weapons capability. But whether the JCPOA is reborn or not, it actually has nothing to do with our willingness and resolve to defend ourselves.”

When President Donald Trump abrogated the 2015 nuclear agreement in May 2018, his administration turned the global financial system into a weapon against Tehran. His “maximum-pressure campaign” resulted in more than 1,500 sanctions against the Iranian government, as well as companies and individuals who did business there, and targeted the nation’s central bank, national oil company and other vital sectors of its economy. It triggered an exodus of corporations and financial institutions that would rather abandon their investments in Iran than risk U.S. Treasury Department sanctions. Iran’s economy-sustaining oil exports plunged to historic lows.

By pulling out of the deal, however, the U.S. paved the way for Iran to advance its nuclear weapons program further than it has in the past. Since Trump’s move, Tehran has produced stocks of uranium enriched to 60% purity, closer toward the 90% purity required for fabricating nuclear weapons, according to the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), the U.N. watchdog.

To get Tehran back into compliance, the Biden Administration has shown a willingness to roll back some of the economic penalties—but not all of them. Either way, there will be significant terrorism sanctions-relief in the deal if it is achieved, says Richard Goldberg, who served on the Trump Administration’s National Security Council and is now a senior fellow at the Foundation for Defense of Democracies, a non-profit that has long-lobbied against the JCPOA. “There will be upfront sanctions-relief for multiple IRGC-connected sectors of Iran’s economy,” he says, adding that sanctions will be lifted on the nation’s central bank and oil company, which are among IRGC’s most important financiers.

There is no dispute among Biden officials that Iran and the IRGC are adversaries that intend to expand their influence in the Middle East, either directly through military force and Iranian-backed political groups as they have in Iraq and Syria, or by funding and equipping proxies such as Hezbollah in Lebanon and Hamas in Palestine. The closer they get to a deal, however, the starker the question facing the Administration: just how many attacks is Washington willing to tolerate in order to restore the nuclear deal.
The Grammy Award-winning rapper Kanye West, who now goes by Ye, has become persona non grata after promoting antisemitic tropes about Jewish power and control and making antisemitic comments in interviews and on social media. In one case, he was banned from Twitter after tweeting that he would go “death con 3 On JEWISH PEOPLE.”

On Tuesday, following on the heels of several other companies that spoke out against the star, German sportswear brand Adidas announced that it is cutting ties with West and ending production of Yeezy branded products, effective immediately. The company said that terminating the partnership will cost it at least $250 million this year.

“Adidas does not tolerate antisemitism and any other sort of hate speech,” the brand said in a statement. “Ye’s recent comments and actions have been unacceptable, hateful and dangerous, and they violate the company’s values of diversity and inclusion, mutual respect and fairness.”

Of all of the companies cutting ties with West, Adidas is noteworthy because of the size of its deal with West and the fact that it was slow to renounce him, only doing so after organizations like the Anti-Defamation League and a social media campaign called the company out. As Adidas faced pressure to cut ties, some argued that the company’s obligations were higher given its historical association with Germany’s Nazi Party.

An Adidas spokesperson declined to comment on the company’s history.

More from TIME
Adidas founders Adi and Rudi Dassler were members of the Nazi party—joining in 1933, the same year Adolf Hitler became Chancellor. The German shoe brand, launched in the 1920s, was one of many German companies to cooperate with the Nazi party during the 1930s and 1940s. (The Adidas corporate site does not mention this history—framing the period of 1900-1949 as “only the start of our story.”)

Read more: Why History Needs World War II Stories of “Ordinary Nazis”

In the 1930s, many German businesses thought that Nazi economic policy would be good for business, since the country achieved “the fastest recovery from the depression of any industrialized country,” says Peter Hayes, an expert on the conduct of Germany’s largest corporations during the Third Reich and emeritus professor of History at Northwestern University. “Every major firm that you’ve ever heard of, in Germany, that is still around and was around then, was implicated in the crimes of the Nazi state.”

While there were small companies like Hugo Boss that grew by making the uniforms for SS officers, many other companies faced little demand for clothing because textiles were diverted for military uniforms. So, the Nazis shifted their factory sites into armaments production—though the clothing companies mostly did not run these operations.

“[Adidas] didn’t make anything vital to the Nazi program until the plant was converted to making munitions during the war, like most German producers of things people wore,” Hayes says. “The firm almost certainly didn’t make the munitions.”

In recent years, German companies have made efforts to make amends for their Nazi pasts. In 2000, German companies partnered with Jewish organizations and the U.S. government to form the foundation Remembrance, Responsibility and Future, which paid reparations to people used as Nazi slave laborers.

At the end of the day, Hayes argues companies are thinking about what’s best for their bottom line, first and foremost: “Corporations quickly detach themselves from characters like [West] for the same reason that they became involved with the Nazis in the first place, which is commercial advantage. Kanye became commercially damaging.”
In the first phase of the War, the Russians made it to the outskirts of Kyiv, and Ukraine looked a goner. In phase two just four weeks later, the victim was on a roll, regaining some thousand settlements while decimating an outclassed foe slugging it out far from home. Now act three, which opened with a miraculous Ukrainian victory that drove the Russians from Kherson, a first-rate strategic prize in the south. But the stage may soon darken.

Sure, the Ukrainians continue to dominate the battlefield thanks to superior motivation and massive injections of Western cash and arms. They are fighting for survival whereas Russians are bolting by the hundred-thousands to escape the draft.

Ukraine’s jubilant President Volodymyr Zelensky now faces a threat that was always lurking in the background. It comes from his big-hearted friends in the West. In November, Joe Biden’s National Security Adviser, Jake Sullivan, met with his Russian counterpart for a “confidential conversation,” which the administration promptly leaked as a message to Kyiv.

They probably discussed the “compromise” Joe Biden would broach after the fall of Kherson. Of course, the President was “not going to tell [the Ukrainians] what they have to do.” But the hint is hard to miss. Reining in a client is what great powers do to avoid entrapment in a deadly conflict, in this case with a wild-eyed Russian adversary backed by an overkill arsenal.

That Vladimir Putin would unleash nuclear weapons was never credible. Start with a single tactical weapon, and you end up with a catastrophic strategic duel. Even in a pre-nuclear age, fabled Prussian strategist Carl von Clausewitz warned against taking the “first step without considering what may be the last.” During the Cuban Missile Crisis, John F. Kennedy cribbed from Clausewitz: “It isn’t the first step that concerns me, but both sides escalating to the fourth and fifth, and we don’t go to the sixth because there is no one around to do so.”

If Putin were serious, U.S. intelligence would know. It would see tactical warheads being hauled out of their tightly guarded bunkers to marry them to delivery vehicles like missiles and planes. These systems would disperse. Coded communications would rise above normal. But it does not end here. Putin would have to take out strategic insurance and place his intercontinental weapons on a war footing. His risk soars because the U.S. would go to DEFCON 2: ICBMS and ballistic submarines ready to go in six hours. At this stage, misperception and miscalculation could trigger strategic war.

Putin has carefully avoided these steps. NATO has warned him, and so have even his so-so allies, the Chinese: “Nuclear wars must not be fought.”

Still, Putin’s threats did rattle the West. Who would want to die for Kyiv? Or freeze while Russia is cutting gas to Europe to a trickle? Paris and Berlin have tried to mediate from day one. Western leaders may be tiring of the war after nine months. In the U.S., Republican opposition to America’s entanglement is rising.

Paradoxically, the angst reflects too much of a good thing. Ukraine’s victories might trigger unbounded Russian revenge, whatever the cost. But the strategic realities may be tilting against Kyiv. In this third act, those brave Ukrainians may not easily duplicate their amazing advances during the second.

Why not? As the Russians pull back into fortified positions, they profit from their short “interior lines,” as Clausewitz had it. To dislodge dug-in troops is harder than to outwit an invader out in the open. As rule of thumb, it takes a 3-to-1 manpower advantage to overcome tank traps, bunkers, and sheltered artillery farther back. President Biden has subtly put his Kyiv counterpart on notice: Time to start talking to Putin. About what—a cease-fire? About accepting Russia’s landgrab in the Southeast prior to its full-scale invasion on 24 February?

Cold-eyed strategists would counsel: “Not so fast, Mr. President!” An armistice always favors the faltering side. A pause would allow the Russians to consolidate with fresh troops and materiel. Why then would Putin match Kyiv’s restraint instead of preparing for a counter-offensive during the lull?

Past Russian behavior is not reassuring. After annexing Crimea and occupying the Donbas region in 2014, Moscow pledged to respect a cease-fire in the southeast and to withdraw heavy weapons. It would honor Ukraine’s sovereignty there and engage in a political process. Instead, Moscow kept Russifying the Donbas and then invaded the rest of Ukraine. Reluctant to arm the victims, the West responded with sanctions after 2014. To Putin, the reticence signaled: Go while the going is good.

What should the West want to accomplish above and beyond serving a compelling moral imperative. It is to save an innocent nation from depredation last seen in World War II when Nazi armies systematically slaughtered civilians. Alas, humanitarian duty is an unreliable guide in statecraft. Self-serving interest comes first.

So, let’s look beyond morality and consider the political imperative. At stake is a 77-years old European order that had at last done away with rape and ruin. The rule was: rivalry and balance yes, imperial conquest no. Putin’s Russia, though, is a revisionist power out to overturn a salutary status quo. He wants a certified sphere of influence in Eastern Europe and the revival of the old Soviet empire, as he keeps repeating.

The strategy is opportunistic—push your pawns forward where the risks are calculable, as they were in Georgia, Crimea and in the Donbas. Who will be next if Western resolve falters? Assume, the U.S. and its allies leash Zelensky by tightening the flow of arms. The Kremlin would conclude that it is safe to crush Ukraine with high-flying jets, missiles, and long-range artillery. The prize would be gain without pain.

This is the deadly dilemma for the West. Putin must not win, but Zelensky must not win too much. Right now, while Ukraine is advancing and Russia is flailing, negotiations will not soon bring about a lasting settlement. So how to crack the dilemma?

Only the principle is easy to lay out. The West is not doing the Ukrainians a one-sided favor by helping them to drive back Putin. The beleaguered nation also happens to fight for a precious European system unhinged by Russian expansionism. So, Ukraine is returning the favor big-time by defying him. It is also defending the rest of the West.

The point is not to dethrone Putin, which only his own people can do. It is to sober him up and to deter adventurism over the long haul. Crimea is presumably lost. But conceding his other conquests in this third act, would embolden him. On the global level, other ambitious revisionists like China and Iran are watching.
The search for the missing Titan vessel has ended after officials said the sub suffered a “catastrophic implosion,” and that the five people onboard are believed to have died, the U.S. Coast Guard (USCG) said during a Thursday afternoon press conference.

“The debris is consistent with a catastrophic implosion of the vessel,” said Rear Admiral John Mauger. Officials said that the location of the debris field was found 1600 feet from the wreck of the Titanic and matched “the location of last communication” of the submersible. The time of the implosion has not yet been determined.

“On behalf of the United States Coast Guard and the entire unified command, I offer my deepest condolences to the families,” Mauger added.

Five major pieces of debris, including the nose cone and pressure hull, were identified as the remains of the submersible, officials added. Officials said they are mapping out the debris field and a timeline of what happened.

Prior to the press conference, OceanGate Expeditions, the company that operated the Titan, released a statement on Thursday saying that they believe all five passengers on the submersible had been “lost.”

“These men were true explorers who shared a distinct spirit of adventure, and a deep passion for exploring and protecting the world’s oceans,” the statement said . “Our hearts are with these five souls and every member of their families during this tragic time. We grieve the loss of life and joy they brought to everyone they knew.”

Search crews announced they had discovered the “debris field” in the North Atlantic using a remotely operated vehicle (ROV) in an area near the Titanic earlier Thursday.

The search and rescue effort
Four countries—Canada, France, England, and the United States—were working together on the search for the Titan, using at least two ROVs that could travel to the seafloor. The search for the Titan, which went missing after the crew lost contact one hour and 45 minutes into its dive early on Sunday, spanned an area twice the size of Connecticut, Captain Jamie Frederick of the USCG said during a press conference early Thursday. The subsurface search was two and half miles deep, reaching the ocean floor.

Rescuers had raced against the clock for days, believing that the the five aboard the vessel could be running out of the 96 hours of oxygen they had onboard that would have run out by Thursday morning,

Noises detected near the Titanic wreckage site on Tuesday had initially raised hopes of finding the missing submersible containing five passengers, the USCG told reporters Wednesday.

The USCG said during Thursday afternoon’s press conference that they used sonar buoys to try to identify any catastrophic failures, but did not hear any during the 72-hour search. “There doesn’t appear to be any connection between the noises and the location on the seafloor,” Rear Adm Mauger said.

“The size of the debris field is consistent with that implosion in the water column,” Mauger added.

Mauger also called the site “an incredibly unforgiving environment,” and did not confirm whether any bodies would be able to be identified. There are currently nine vessels on scene, though those vessels will later be demobilized over the next 24 hours. Underwater robots will remain on scene to gather more information.

Crews work on Coast Guard vessels at Coast Guard Base Boston in Boston, Massachusetts, on June 21, 2023. (JOSEPH PREZIOSO—AFP/Getty Images)
Crews work on Coast Guard vessels at Coast Guard Base Boston in Boston, Massachusetts, on June 21, 2023. JOSEPH PREZIOSO—AFP/Getty Images
Safety warning signs
OceanGate, a privately-owned company, provides diving tours of the famous shipwreck using submersibles that can carry up to five people. The company was warned of potential safety issues with the submersible in 2018, when David Lochridge, OceanGate’s director of marine operations, provided a report detailing potentially dangerous outcomes if the Titan vessel traveled too far deep into the ocean, according to court documents. In the court filing, Lochridge argued that he was wrongfully terminated due to his safety warnings.

A group of industry members warned the company again two months later, when over 30 oceanographers, explorers, and prominent members of the field wrote a letter to OceanGate’s CEO, Stockton Rush, warning that the company’s decision to opt out of traditional safety assessments and classification systems could lead to outcomes “ranging from minor to catastrophic.”

Read More: A Titanic Tourist Submersible Is Missing. Here’s How That Differs From a Submarine

In a blog post on its website, OceanGate explained why it opted out of traditional safety classing by independent groups like American Bureau of Shipping (ABS), DNV/GL, Lloyd’s Register, and others.

“The vast majority of marine (and aviation) accidents are a result of operator error, not mechanical failure. As a result, simply focusing on classing the vessel does not address the operational risks,” the blog post says. “When OceanGate was founded the goal was to pursue the highest reasonable level of innovation in the design and operation of manned submersibles. By definition, innovation is outside of an already accepted system. However, this does not mean that OceanGate does meet standards where they apply, but it does mean that innovation often falls outside of the existing industry paradigm.”

When asked about the safety of the vessel, then still in development, OceanGate’s CEO, who is one of the missing Titan passengers, told reporters in an interview with CBS over six years ago that, “by the time we’re done testing it, I believe it’s pretty much invulnerable.”

Who was on board?
In addition to Bush, British billionaire adventurer Hamish Harding has been identified as one of the victims. A post on Harding’s Facebook page on Sunday said that he would be joining OceanGate as a mission specialist to help conduct a dive. “The team on the sub has a couple of legendary explorers, some of which have done over 30 dives to the RMS Titanic since the 1980s including PH Nargeolet,” the post said.

Paul-Henri Nargeolet, who was also on board, was a submersible pilot who used to be commander for the French Navy. He led numerous expeditions, including to the Titanic wreckage, and previously acknowledged the risk in underwater exploration: “If you are 11 meters or 11 kilometers down, if something bad happens, the result is the same,” he told the Irish Examiner in 2019. “When you’re in very deep water, you’re dead before you realize that something is happening.”

British-Pakistani businessman Shahzada Dawood and his son Suleman were also on board, their family said in a public statement. The elder Dawood, who is reportedly one of the wealthiest Pakistani men, serves on the board of Prince’s Trust International, a charity organization founded by King Charles III.

In a statement, the company said: “Our entire focus is on the crew members in the submersible and their families,” adding, “We are deeply thankful for the extensive assistance we have received from several government agencies and deep sea companies in our efforts to reestablish contact with the submersible.”

What were they trying to see?
Fewer than 250 people in the world have visited the shipwreck at the bottom of the Atlantic Ocean since its discovery in 1985. Among them is the film director James Cameron, who directed the 1997 movie Titanic. Eight-day Titanic diving tours for tourists conducted by OceanGate cost $250,000 per guest, the BBC reported.

The wreck of the Titanic (Xavier DESMIER—Gamma-Rapho/Getty Images)
The wreck of the Titanic Xavier DESMIER—Gamma-Rapho/Getty Images
The two-part wreckage of the Titanic is located about 370 miles off the coast of Newfoundland in Canada, at a depth of roughly 12,600 feet—or 2.3 miles. The window for tourists to see the wreckage in its current state is believed to be closing due to rapid disintegration of the ship’s frame as a result of rust and bacteria breaking it down. At any moment, the Titanic’s famous bow could collapse, according to one report. Experts believe that by the year 2030, what remains of the ship may be completely eroded.

Read More: See Photos of the Wreck of the Titanic When It Was First Discovered

More than 1,500 people lost their lives when the RMS Titanic sank on its maiden voyage from Southampton, England, to New York City, on April 15, 1912. Ever since, the tragedy has captivated the public and inspired multiple books, films, and songs.
For decades, the threats that defined Israel arrived from without, and produced a basic cohesion. On security, Jewish Israelis spoke as one, historically giving the Israeli Defense Forces (IDF) approval ratings near 90%.

But the paroxysm convulsing the country in its 75th year is wholly internal. The current crisis rises not from any Arab neighbor—several of which now enjoy cordial relations with the Jewish state—but over how Jewish Israelis choose to live. The question is fraught, and appears to threaten the fabric of the nation.

Like its borders, Israel’s government structure is not fixed. It’s a parliamentary democracy, but without a constitution. The Prime Minister sits in the Knesset, the legislature, and the only check on the majority is the Supreme Court, which at times decides its role for itself.

Now, however, the Knesset has moved to take control of the court. A law narrowly passed on July 24 that bars justices from overruling government actions. The power play, pushed by the most right-wing government in the country’s history, had already sparked 30 weeks of massive street protests at the time of the vote, with no end in sight. These factors will continue to drive events in the months ahead:

Right-wing ascent
Israel's Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu , center, listens to Israel's Minister of Energy Israel Katz, Israel's Minister of Justice Yariv Levin, and Israel's National Security Minister Itamar Ben-Gvir at the Knesset, Israel's parliament, in Jerusalem on July 10.
Israel's Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu , center, listens to Israel's Minister of Energy Israel Katz, Israel's Minister of Justice Yariv Levin, and Israel's National Security Minister Itamar Ben-Gvir at the Knesset, Israel's parliament, in Jerusalem on July 10. Maya Alleruzzo—AP
To win in last November’s elections, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu had to assemble a coalition that included parties so far right they existed on the fringe. (His national security minister, for example, was deemed unfit to serve in the IDF because of his extremism.) Their grudge against the high court dates to 2005, when justices approved the government’s removal of 8,000 settlers from the Gaza Strip. Now their eagerness to expand Jewish control in the West Bank and their antipathy toward Arabs, including the 20% of Israeli citizens who are Palestinian, has found traction in the 73% of young Israeli Jews who identify as being on the right, a share that rose after 2019 violence in “mixed” Israeli cities. With young people the least liberal demographic, time is on conservatives' side.

Internal divisions
Israel has long been led by European, or Ashkenazi, Jews even though most Israelis today are Mizrahi, who trace their origins to the Middle East and other parts of North Africa; they are more likely to be working class and religious, and are historically underrepresented in positions of power. Netanyahu, though himself Ashkenazi, has long channeled Mizrahi resentments. They see the real goal of the protesters, a former Israeli ambassador to the U.S. argued in a recent op-ed, as“to preserve the power lost at the polls by the Ashkenazi elite.”

Palestinian bystanders 
Though the world may be preoccupied with the contest between two peoples claiming the same land, the puzzle of how to accommodate Palestinians aspirations has not featured in Israeli politics for more than a decade. But with no political outlet for Palestinians and militant settlers empowered on the West Bank, there’s also the question of the impact of Israeli politics among the 3 million Palestinians living there.


Palestinians inspect the ruins of the house belonging to the family of Kamal Jouri, which was demolished by Israeli troops in the West Bank city of Nablus, on June 22. Majdi Mohammed—AP
Read more: What Israel's Controversial Judicial Overhaul Means for Palestinians

Illiberal allies
Critics have claimed that Netanyahu’s intentions for Israeli democracy can be detected in his embrace of Hungary’s Viktor Orban and other elected Europeans with authoritarian leanings. Closer to home, Arab kingdoms that once promoted the Palestinian cause have found common ground with their erstwhile opponent: The Saudis admire Israel’s tech industry—its security products, such as NSO’s Pegasus surveillance tool, have found users among authoritarian regimes—and share with the country an enmity for Iran. Israel’s newer alignments serve as a counterweight to the West and its demands, including to resolve the Palestinian issue.

Washington watches
The U.S. guarantee of Israeli security has many sources, but “the core of that relationship is certainly on democratic values,” the White House press secretary declared after the July 24 vote, which President Biden had repeatedly warned against. His invitation for Netanyahu to visit the U.S. remains in place, however, as does support for Israel on Capitol Hill, and $3.8 billion a year in military aid.

Read More: The American Public's Views on Israel Are Undergoing a Profound Shift. Washington Hasn't Caught Up

More to Come
The crisis is expected to last for months, not least because the high court is set to review the new law in September. And when the Knesset returns from recess a month later, it may take up another reform, giving lawmakers a hand in naming jurists. Meanwhile, dissenters continue the search for leverage. Thousands of IDF reservists, for example, have vowed to stand down in protest, including fighter pilots. Still, Netanyanhu appeared sanguine about any security threat their loss might pose—perhaps understanding that, at this point, a threat from outside the nation is the one thing guaranteed to bring it together.
The obvious and intended point of reference for the shattering surprise attack on Israel on Oct. 7 was the 1973 October War, the devastating invasion that Arab armies launched precisely 50 years earlier, plus a day. It was the last time Israelis awoke to a life-changing assault that its intelligence apparatus had not seen coming, and also the last time they found themselves, officially, in a “war.”

Another analogue might be the Tet Offensive, the 1968 Viet Cong surprise attack that changed the course of the Vietnam War. Like the Hamas assault out of the Gaza Strip, it broke out on the morning of a holiday and seemingly everywhere at once; it demonstrated capacities unforeseen in a guerrilla force; it briefly overwhelmed a far superior military; and it produced images that challenged fundamental assumptions about a conflict that had ground on for years.


Eyad Baba—AFP/Getty Images
In Israel, the challenged assumption is that its conflict with the Palestinians can be “managed” rather than solved. Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu all but disavowed that assumption as he addressed the camera in the Kirya, the Defense Ministry high-rise in downtown Tel Aviv: the coming conflict meant the country was in “not an operation. Not a round. At war.” 

And like the October War and the Tet Offensive, the Hamas raid and its fallout are forcing reconsideration worldwide too, as political and military leaders from Washington to Beijing weigh the possible outcomes of the war. The attack stalls, and perhaps kills, a hoped for peace deal between Israel and Saudi Arabia that depended on the presumed acquiescence of occupied Palestinians to the status quo. It calls into question America’s long-standing hope that it would be able to focus attention away from the Middle East, and it resets a competition between global powers in the region. Once again, the world is finding the near future of geopolitics depends heavily on Israel and the Palestinians.

Brief, lopsided battles with Gaza militants, usually fought by drone or fighter jet, had become so regular that Israeli officials had come to refer to them, in bemused tones, as a homeowner’s routine chores: “cutting the grass,” they would say. Mowing was the most starkly military component of “managing the conflict,” which has been the overarching approach for decades. The strategy assumes that there is no political solution to Jewish Israelis’ contest with the Palestinians, both of whom want the same land. The best that can be done is to contain them.

On the hills of the West Bank, which 3 million Palestinians share with some 500,000 Jewish settlers, much of that management is outsourced to a formidable internal security apparatus that answers to Palestinian National Authority President Mahmoud Abbas. Also known as Abu Mazen, Abbas, now 87, wagered that subduing violent resistance (which, conveniently, also meant subduing Hamas, a rival to Abbas’ Fatah party) would produce negotiations that ended with a Palestinian state. That wager has not paid off.

There are no longer Jewish settlers among the 2.2 million Palestinians crowded into the Gaza Strip. They departed, with the Israeli military, in 2005. For most of the time since, the enclave has been ruled by Hamas, or the Islamic Resistance Movement, and sealed off by Israel. As on the West Bank, Israel controls Gaza’s power supply, telephone systems, and much of its economy, but it has proved harder to manage. Poverty is endemic, and the youthful population has no option to leave. Israeli security has relied heavily on the fences and walls that Hamas guerrillas tunneled under in 2014, and on the morning of Oct. 7 tore down and flew paragliders over. 

The scenes that ensued are seared into the souls of Israelis who already possess, along with the most powerful military in the region, a deep reservoir of trauma. In the chaotic morning hours of sabbath, everything was overwhelmed: the Israel Defense Force that forms the core of Israeli society, the Iron Dome missile batteries that ordinarily shield the civilian population, and the almost luxurious sense of security that led hundreds of young people to an overnight rave in the desert where the paragliders landed and opened fire. Some of the terrified young revelers ended up among the estimated 100 hostages, young and old, Israelis and foreign citizens, carried into Gaza as hostages.

Abduction, including of bodies, is a tried and true tactic of the asymmetrical warfare Israel faces, offering bargaining leverage from hit-and-run operations. Like the deaths of civilians, the kidnappings also guaranteed Israel sympathy, and wide latitude to respond; Netanyahu vowed to turn parts of Gaza “to rubble,” though how to do that with dozens of Israeli hostages in the line of fire?

As darkness fell on Oct. 7, Israeli forces were hauling tanks south and, in Gaza, Palestinians’ phones buzzed with texts from the IDF, warning them out of buildings that were about to be bombed. In an instant, Israeli society was no longer torn asunder by Netanyahu’s efforts to sideline the Supreme Court. But the feeling was far from familiar. Some, groping for a reference point, thought not of 1973 or 1968, but 2001. It felt like 9/11. In just moments, a great deal had changed. —With reporting by Solcyre Burga
If it's hard to make people care about someone they've never met, it's even harder when that someone is behind a wall. But in A Day in the Life of Abed Salama, the journalist Nathan Thrall makes a virtue of that. The book reports a profoundly difficult story—a father searching for his five-year-old son at the scene of a fiery school bus crash—made more difficult by where it occurs: On the Palestinian side of Israel's separation barrier.

“There is so much discussion—of abstract statistics and talking points and two states and one state, analyses of the 30th anniversary of Oslo ad nauseum,” Thrall says, from his Jerusalem home. “And I feel that all of that is an enormous distraction from the actual present-day reality of people in this place.”

“This place” is the territory known for centuries as Palestine, but for the last 75 years has defied simple description. In 1948, a Jewish army established the state of Israel on part of it, then 19 years later conquered the rest. The victors built an extraordinary nation while subjugating an Arab population that claims the same land.

So, while the 2012 school bus crash is the event that propels A Day in the Life of Abed Salama, the subject of the book is the control of the Palestinians by the Israelis. Its 272 pages take in the life stories not only of Salama and his household, but also the roles played in their lives by the officials, passersby, and first responders who, eventually, showed up at the scene that day.

TIME: How did you come to find Abed?

NATHAN THRALL: I had decided that I wanted to write about this accident before I met Abed. You know, the parents and teachers who were involved in the crash live two miles away from me, but on the other side of a 26-foot tall concrete wall and, I drive by that walled ghetto all the time, and it's really easy to ignore it.

But after this crash took place I couldn't stop thinking about the lives of the parents and children who were involved and were sharing the city with me and living a radically different existence than mine. And so when professionally I found the time to actually work on a book, it just so happened that a very close family friend told me that she has a distant relative who was a father of one of the children who passed away. And I came to his home and met him and started asking him questions about an accident that was nearly a decade old.

And he opened himself up to me. We immediately had a connection, and he started kind of telling me about his entire life. It wasn't just interviewing him. It was a process of getting to know him and getting to know his whole family. There was this cloud of silence around the accident and everyone is so afraid of upsetting the bereaved that no one talks about it, and as a result he really felt hungry to talk about it. He yearns to talk about it because it made him feel closer to his son.

Not a lot of people write about Palestinians these days.

They don't.

Talk about that. Everyone's writing about Israel at the moment.

People will say “it's too complicated.” They have a Get Out of Jail Free card with respect to having a position on this issue, because it's too complicated.

There is real complexity, there's no doubt, but the way to address that was not to write yet another analysis that “clarifies the situation.” What you really needed was to show the people who live within that complexity and their lives and what it actually means to navigate it. That's not complex at all. That’s totally comprehensible and it grounds people in a situation that is, you know, grossly unjust. And that every American citizen is complicit in.

It is complicated, though. You take a whole book to make that clear. In fact you manage to find drama in the most boring thing the Israelis do—which is bend the situation to their will through administration, the most boring word in the world. The Israeli general who runs the occupation of the West Bank has the title Civil Administrator.

An invasion in Jenin and several Palestinians are killed, or an attack in Tel Aviv—those things make headlines. But they are the foam on the surface of the sea. And the sea doesn't make headlines. The sea is this enormous system of control and the only way to get to that system is to show ordinary people struggling through it.

I wanted an everyday occurrence—a car accident. What does it mean to have a car accident in this awful set of circumstances where there’s an elaborate system of rules that makes it difficult for a parent to find his child, to access a hospital that his child might have been taken to? There's an elaborate system of color coded IDs that dictate who can go where even within the same family. There's a wall that snakes through and circles a community, and its route is actually dictated by a logic. All of that is the everyday reality of all of these people, and they faced it on the worst day of their lives.

And what is the logic of that wall? [Israel announced the separation barrier at the height of the Second Intifada as a means to impede suicide bombings.]

Well, first and foremost, a logic of the wall that specifically encircles the enclave of Anata [where Abed lives] and Shuafat Camp—that was dictated by the Israel's overriding goal, which was to minimize the number of Palestinians in the center of Jerusalem and to route the wall in such a way that would put the maximum number of Palestinians outside the heart of the city while retaining, for Israel, the maximum amount of land.

Your previous book, The Only Language They Understand, made clear that the “language” that has moved the conflict in either direction was coercion, was force. The force is all on one side now. Are the Palestinians as bad off as they've ever been?

I would say that the Palestinians are in the worst situation they've been in since the Nakba, since 1948. The book is called A Day in the Life of Abed Salama but it's not just a day. It's the entire life and family history of several characters, both Jewish and Palestinian. And those everyday experiences described in the book include a mother whose teenage boy throws stones at occupying soldiers and is entirely helpless to do anything to protect her son when at 1:30 in the morning the army comes and takes him away and refuses to tell her where they're taking him and what he's done. And she spends over a week just trying to find where her son is located after this happens. That feeling of total powerlessness that every Palestinian family feels, those are the experiences that are in this book. And those experiences are as widespread and as far from being alleviated as they've ever been.

What do you make of the crisis in Israel? [The government of Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu is passing legislation sidelining the Supreme Court, the only check on its power. Massive weekly protests call it an existential crisis for Israeli democracy.]

The fundamental element that unites all of the people who are involved in this debate over the judicial reform, both for it and against it, is the notion that Israel is a democracy, and it exists within the pre-1967 borders. Because that's the only way you could imagine that Israel is a democracy, when for the majority of the state's existence it's held millions of people of a different ethnic or national group without basic civil rights.

All of the debate is about preserving democracy, the threats to democracy.

And yet, if you actually ask any of these people they will tell you, "No, Israel doesn't actually end at the Green Line at the pre-1967 border." One in ten Israeli Jews lives beyond the Green Line [in Jewish settlements in the Palestinian West Bank], and when they go home, they don't have to stop at a checkpoint; they just drive on a highway and go straight to their homes. And when they vote, they vote in their settlements. And the Central Bureau of Statistics, when it lists the number of residents of the country, it lists the people in the settlements. In every respect these people are living inside Israel. And they have millions of Palestinians without rights living in the same territory, next to them. And so to me, the entire debate over the preservation or threat to Israeli democracy is entirely mis-characterized.

The book mentions young Israelis posting gleefully on Facebook about Palestinian kindergarteners dying in a burning school bus. It's grotesque, but it's not weirdly out of line. More than 70 percent of Israeli young people characterize themselves as right wing.

This was 10, 11 years ago. There was a left wing Israeli TV news anchor, and what he was most shocked by was, they were posting under their own names. He was horrified by the fact that his society had this strong element of unvarnished racism, and so he actually wanted to, as he put it, put a mirror up to the society and to go and interview the people who were posting. And in a way you could say that his report was prescient because the young teens he interviewed are now probably voters for people like [Itamar] Ben Gvir, who's the National Security Minister and espouses openly racist views.

In 2002, Saudi Arabia offered Israel diplomatic relations with Arab states in exchange for a Palestinian state. Going by reports of the negotations being steered by the Biden Administration, the price for diplomatic relations is down to the kind of concessions U.S. officials historically jawboned Israel about—easing up on settlements and the like.

That is part of the reason that the Palestinian situation has never been this bad since 1948. The Palestinian national movement has long held out hope that at the very least the Arab states would back them and it's become abundantly clear to every Palestinian that's not the case. They are truly alone.

And yet it appears that in the U.S., the Palestinians are gaining sympathy. At least among Democrats and young people, public opinion is moving in line with the European perspective.

There’s no doubt that younger Americans and Democrats and younger American Jews are all coming to a position that is less blindly, you know, Israel, right or wrong. But at the same time we are eons away from any kind of significant change in policy. That's part of the reason that I feel ordinary people just need to get a better sense of what it actually is to live in this place.

The interview has been edited for clarity and length.


